21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

UNIT-1: INTRODUCTION TO ETHICS OF AI

Role of Artificial Intelligence in Human Life, Understanding Ethics, Why
Ethics in AI? Ethical Considerations of AI, Current Initiatives in AI and Ethics,
Ethical Issues with our relationship with artificial Entities
1.Role of Artificial Intelligence in Human Life:
Artificial Intelligence is the possession of simulated human intelligence by
machines, it is synonymous to machine intelligence. It is programmed and
designed by developers and it can act and think like a human. AI becomes one of
the important parts of daily life.
In a wide area of day-to-day services, AI technology is used. This technology
reduces the human effort. People are using this technology in many industries to
develop autonomous robots for performing various activities. The machine can
increase the speed of work and process and give an accurate result.
AI technology is spreading wide across all the fields, to reduce the efforts of
humans and provide optimised results. This blog will help you know the
importance of Artificial intelligence in our daily lives. Artificial Intelligence
Course helps you to attain a deeper understanding and necessary skills in the field
of Artificial Intelligence.
The role of Artificial Intelligence in day-to-day life falls under two categories.
They are,


Artificial Intelligence in Software



Embodied Artificial Intelligence

1.1 Artificial Intelligence in Software
Artificial Intelligence software is a computer program designed to mimic human
actions and does not require any peripheral devices to perform. Software with
Artificial Intelligence can be downloaded from any online store and can be
installed on the existing device. They help in making the daily routine much

1

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

simpler than before. The importance of Artificial Intelligence Software is of four
types in the industry. They are,


Artificial Intelligence Platforms have built-in algorithms to provide space
to build an application from the scratch.



Chatbots helps in providing active conversations imitating humans‟
response.



Deep Learning Software offers image recognition, speech recognition,
etc.



Machine Learning Software helps the computer learn through the data
and work accordingly.

Artificial Intelligence is an interesting area of field to explore and expand your
knowledge. With the growing science and technology in human life, there could
be twice a huge job vacancy in the field. Make the right choice and join Artificial
Intelligence Course in Chennai to build a successful career!
Voice Assistants
AI backs up the voice assistants like Google Home, Siri, Cortona, and Alexa to
decode the voice commands of their masters. AI also helps these applications to
take up the databases from the cloud storage platforms to give back the tailored
search engine results. Voice assistants are also deployed in healthcare to detect
diseases through vocal biomarkers. In telehealth applications, voice-based chat
boxes are made available for screening and classifying.
Face detection
Face detection is one of the most popular uses of Artificial Intelligence in our
daily life. It uses the Image Processing technology of Artificial Intelligence to
identify faces with the help of distance between two eyes, shape of the face,
edges, and other features. This face ID unlock feature is commonly seen in the
smartphones of today.
Face recognition software is using Generative Adversarial Neural Networks
(GANN) to lower the margin of error. These neural networks are also being
honed to detect fraudulent use of Deepfake technology. AI software, that detects
2

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

facial expressions to determine mood and intent is also being developed by
several sectors. Emotion AI or Affective Computing is a growing field of study
for assessing client satisfaction.
Financial and Banking Sector
In Banking, Financial Services and Insurance(BFSI) Sector the AI technology is
used to handle the numerous activities like the investment in stocks, financial
operations, and much more. The AI technology can help the bank to provide
better services to the customer and give them hassle-free banking
solutions. Chatbots provide a strong return on investment in terms of cost
reductions, making them one of the most widely deployed AI applications across
industries.
Personalized Marketing
To increase engagement, brands use AI-driven personalization solutions based on
customer data. According to aOneSpot Research report, 88 percent of surveyed
consumers believe that more personalized content makes them feel better about a
brand.
Recent AI innovations claim to use computer vision to predict the performance of
an advertisement, assisting brands in reaching the right people and serving those
who require those products. Learn the inner play of marketing by joining
the Digital Marketing Course in Chennai and be the wolf in the marketing
department. Depending on the marketing stage, AI marketing apps can assist both
prospects and retargeted customers. Artificial Intelligence is used with
Augmented (AU) Reality for the customers to choose from the wide range of
product collections of an online shopping website or the store itself.
Healthcare
In the Medical Science sector, AI technology is used in the number of
applications and gives an incredible value. AI technology is used for analytics,
research and also used to develop a personal health care assistant. Bots are
developed to give support to customers. It is used in a hospital for scheduling an
appointment with 24/7 assistance. Image Processing in Artificial
Intelligence helps in X-ray Imaging, PET Scans, UV Imaging, Medical CT,
Cancer Cell Image Processing, and much more.
3

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

Heavy Industries
In Heavy Industries AI is widely used in the production units. They are designed
as a robot to carry out specific tasks autonomously. They can displace the
materials from one place to another, without a reduction in the efficiency of the
machines.
Not only in the production they are also used in the planning phase to manage
stocks, raw materials and inventories. Using AI technology in the big industry can
help them to complete their tasks on time and help them to generate more profits
in businesses.
Cyber Security
The major role of Artificial Intelligence is that it can improve cyber security
systems. It performs by leveraging data from previous threats and learning
patterns and indicators that appear to predict and prevent attacks. In addition to
preventing external threats, AI can monitor internal threats or breaches and
recommend corrective actions, resulting in data theft or abuse prevention.
AI-based cyber security systems can provide the most up-to-date knowledge of
global and industry-specific threats, allowing you to make more informed
prioritization decisions based not just on what could be used to attack your
systems, but also on what is most likely to be used to attack your systems.
Air Transport
Artificial Intelligence in Air ways is used for fuel efficiency optimization. The
deployed AI systems with Machine Learning algorithms collect and analyze flight
data such as aircraft type and weight, route distance and altitudes, weather, and so
on. These data help in estimating the optimal amount of fuel needed for the
flight.
Many airlines improve their customer service with AI-powered chatbots that
assist passengers with flight booking and management, baggage tracking,
answering questions, and other types of assistance.
Gaming and Entertainment
The importance of Artificial Intelligence in streaming apps is that they
recommend custom content based on the user‟s interaction with various media.
4

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

These apps create catalogues of music, movies, and TV shows tailored to each
individual user‟s preferences by using AI to parse through ever-increasing user
data.
Innovations in gaming Artificial Intelligence has concentrated on giving more
interesting challenges to the gamer rather than assessing the gamers‟ mindset.
Some of these gaming applications use Virtual Reality (VR) headsets to provide
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) for better engagement with the person. As
the game progresses, AI assists these games in adapting to the user‟s behaviour
based on examined stimuli.
Navigation and Travel
The Artificial Intelligence programmers‟ work behind navigation apps like Waze
and Google Maps never ends. The digital maps are created based on geographical
images provided by the satellite. The importance of Artificial Intelligence is that
with the use of predictive models, it assists in determining paths on satellite
photos covered by natural overgrowth. Regular route changes have been made
easier because of the imaging methods based on Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) and Graph Neural Networks (GNN).
Security and Surveillance
It is practically hard for a human to keep a continual check on many CCTV
network monitors at the same time. As a result, we‟ve felt compelled to automate
such monitoring operations and improve them using machine learning
approaches.
Artificial Intelligence frees up human surveillants to focus on verifying and
responding to critical situations. AI video monitoring software handles the
ongoing monitoring and detection aspect of surveillance. You could ask, Why do
we need Artificial Intelligence if humans could perform the same task
effortlessly? The reason is Artificial intelligence can detect abnormal activity that
human eyes may overlook.
Surveillance systems in high-risk public venues, such as government buildings,
use an extension of AI-based facial recognition software. At the moment, liberal

5

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

governments are attempting to mitigate the possibility of privacy breaches as a
result of AI spies.

Embodied Artificial Intelligence
Embodied Artificial Intelligence is the hardware created for installing Al to
mimic human actions and to work on automation. Thus, Embodied Artificial
Intelligence entails the creation of specific devices with AI capabilities. They
move through the physical world and affect it with their actions just like a human
would do. The hardware with AI can be seen in Self-driven cars, drones, etc.
Self-Driven Vehicles
Autonomous Vehicle Technology with AI innovation is taking place as a result of
worldwide corporate interest. Beyond cruise control and blind-spot detection, AI
is advancing to fully autonomous capabilities.
Vehicles are being taught to run independently using Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL), a form of machine learning. The role of Artificial Intelligence is
to make predictions in planning the route with possible static and dynamic
impediments.
It swerves corresponding to the neighbouring vehicles and other unforeseeable
circumstances. Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) technology
enables this with real-time sensor-based orientation to the environment.
Internet of Things (IoT)
The convergence of AI and the Internet of Things (IoT) creates a plethora of
opportunities for developing smarter home appliances that operate with minimal
human intervention. While IoT is concerned with devices interacting with the
internet, AI assists these devices in learning from data.
Artificial Intelligence is important in unlocking the power of data collected by
IoT devices via sensors. Learning‟s from this data over multiple iterations
improve the ability of IoT devices to respond to human stimuli and requirements.

6

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

Artificial Intelligence is the backbone of tremendous technological growth. The
role of Artificial Intelligence is crucial in today‟s world as it has already mended
the daily life of commoners with it. Artificial Intelligence could be a lucrative
field in the future with booming job opportunities.

2. Understanding Ethics:
What is AI ethics?
Intended audience and existing government guidance The following
guidance is designed to outline values, principles, and guidelines to assist department
and delivery leads in ensuring that they develop and deploy AI ethically, safely, and
responsibly. It is designed to complement and supplement the Data Ethics
Framework. The Data Ethics Framework is a practical tool that should be used in any
project initiation phase. AI ethics a remarkable time of human promise has been
ushered in by the convergence of the ever-expanding availability of big data, the
soaring speed and stretch of cloud computing platforms, and the advancement of
increasingly sophisticated machine learning algorithms. This brave new digitally
interconnected world is delivering rapid gains in the power of AI to better society.
Innovations in AI are already dramatically improving the provision of essential social
goods and services from healthcare, education, and transportation to food supply,
energy, and environmental management. These bounties are, in fact, likely just the
start. Because AI and machine learning systems organically improve with the
enlargement of access to data and the growth of computing power, they will only
become more effective and useful as the information age continues to develop apace.
It may not be long before AI technologies become gatekeepers for the advancement
of vital public interests and sustainable human development. This prospect that
progress in AI will help humanity to confront some of its most urgent challenges is
exciting, but legitimate worries still abound. As with any new and rapidly evolving
technology, a steep learning curve means that mistakes and miscalculations will be
made and that both unanticipated and harmful impacts will inevitably occur. AI is no
exception. In order to manage these impacts responsibly and to direct the
development of AI systems toward optimal public benefit, you will have to make
7

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

considerations of AI ethics and safety a first priority. This will involve integrating
considerations of the social and ethical implications of the design and use of AI
systems into every stage of the delivery of your AI project. It will also involve a
collaborative effort between the data scientists, product managers, data engineers,
domain experts, and delivery managers on your team to align the development of
artificial intelligence technologies with ethical values and principles that safeguard
and promote the wellbeing of the communities that these technologies affect. By
including a primer on AI ethics with the Guide, we are providing you with the
conceptual resources and practical tools that will enable you to steward the
responsible design and implementation of AI projects.
These values, principles, and techniques are intended both to motivate morally
acceptable practices and to prescribe the basic duties and obligations necessary to
produce ethical, fair, and safe AI applications.
Why AI ethics? The field of AI ethics has largely emerged as a response to the
range of individual and societal harms that the misuse, abuse, poor design, or
negative unintended consequences of AI systems may cause. As a way to orient you
to the importance of building a robust culture of AI ethics, here is a table that
represents some of the most consequential forms that these potential harms may take:
2.1Potential Harms Caused by AI
Systems Bias and Discrimination
Because they gain their insights from the existing structures and dynamics of the
societies they analyse, data driven technologies can reproduce, reinforce, and amplify
the patterns of marginalisation, inequality, and discrimination that exist in these
societies. Likewise, because many of the features, metrics, and analytic structures of
the models that enable data mining are chosen by their designers, these technologies
can potentially replicate their designers‟ preconceptions and biases. Finally, the data
samples used to train and test algorithmic systems can often be insufficiently
representative of the populations from which they are drawing inferences. This
creates real possibilities of biased and discriminatory outcomes, because the data
being fed into the systems is flawed from the start.

8

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

Denial of Individual Autonomy, Recourse, and Rights
When citizens are subject to decisions, predictions, or classifications produced by AI
systems, situations may arise where such individuals are unable to hold directly
accountable the parties responsible for these outcomes. AI systems automate
cognitive functions that were previously attributable exclusively to accountable
human agents. This can complicate the designation of responsibility in
algorithmically generated outcomes, because the complex and distributed character
of the design, production, and implementation processes of AI systems may make it
difficult to pinpoint accountable parties. In cases of injury or negative consequence,
such an accountability gap may harm the autonomy and violate the rights of the
affected individuals.
Non-transparent, Unexplainable, or Unjustifiable
Outcomes many machine learning models generate their results by operating on high
dimensional correlations that are beyond the interpretive capabilities of human scale
reasoning. In these cases, the rationale of algorithmically produced outcomes that
directly affect decision subjects remains opaque to those subjects. While in some use
cases, this lack of explainability may be acceptable, in some applications, where the
processed data could understanding Artificial Intelligence Ethics and Safety 5
harbour traces of discrimination, bias, inequity, or unfairness, the opaqueness of the
model may be deeply problematic.
2.1 Invasions of Privacy
Threats to privacy are posed by AI systems both as a result of their design and
development processes, and as a result of their deployment. As AI projects are
anchored in the structuring and processing of data, the development of AI
technologies will frequently involve the utilisation of personal data. This data is
sometimes captured and extracted without gaining the proper consent of the data
subject or is handled in a way that reveals (or places under risk the revelation of)
personal information. On the deployment end, AI systems that target, profile, or
nudge data subjects without their knowledge or consent could in some circumstances
be interpreted as infringing upon their ability to lead a private life in which they are
able to intentionally manage the transformative effects of the technologies that
9

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

influence and shape their development. This sort of privacy invasion can
consequently harm a person‟s more basic right to pursue their goals and life plans
free from unchosen influence.
Isolation and Disintegration of Social Connection
While the capacity of AI systems to curate individual experiences and to personalise
digital services holds the promise of vastly improving consumer life and service
delivery, this benefit also comes with potential risks. Excessive automation, for
example, might reduce the need for human-to-human interaction, while
algorithmically enabled hyper-personalisation, by limiting our exposure to
worldviews different from ours, might polarise social relationships. Well-ordered and
cohesive societies are built on relations of trust, empathy, and mutual understanding.
As AI technologies become more prevalent, it is important that these relations be
preserved.
Unreliable, Unsafe, or Poor-QualityOutcomes
Irresponsible data management, negligent design and production processes,
and questionable deployment practices can, each in their own ways, lead to the
implementation and distribution of AI systems that produce unreliable, unsafe, or
poor-quality outcomes. These outcomes can do direct damage to the wellbeing of
individual persons and the public welfare. They can also undermine public trust in
the responsible use of societally beneficial AI technologies, and they can create
harmful inefficiencies by virtue of the dedication of limited public resources to
inefficient or even detrimental AI technologies.
3.Why Ethics in AI? Why Now?
We have a question of how to develop codes of ethics in artificial intelligence.
But why look at this now? Hardly a day goes by when there is not a prominent media
story about the risks and benefits of artificial intelligence. Alongside accounts of the
technological promise of AI are warnings about its perils. Even those who herald a
glorious future with AI often paint a picture of profound social and individual
change. But should we be worried? And if so, what should be we worried about in
particular? And precisely how worried should we be? For one obvious feature of AI
10

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

is its broad nature and manifold applications. There is also some problem even in
defining it, for it‟s often been observed that a technological capacity is heralded as AI
until it‟s in place, then, as John McCarthy, the computer scientist who coined the
term „artificial intelligence‟, put it, „as soon as it works, no one calls it AI anymore‟
(Vardi 2012). The borderline between what counts as AI proper and other forms of
technology can be blurred. Some AI systems are so embedded within technology that
they are assumed and almost invisible. This also means that it‟s hard or impossible in
many cases to say which ethical and other value issues are presented by AI per se,
and which by other features of technology. AI is already with us; many applications
are fast developing and will be with us in the near to medium term. It is a disputed
question when other even more advanced forms of AI including superintelligence
will be here, if ever. Many consider that the emergence of super intelligence is an
inevitability; there are the usual disputes about how long it will be before it is with
us, as well as disputes about whether we should welcome its arrival, and if so, why.
Philosophical and technical disputes converge, in the debates about whether we will
ever develop AI which has consciousness and which is sufficiently complex, and in
the right ways, to merit our moral concerns and protection. AI may involve robotics
of varying complexity; it may involve the manipulation of vast amounts of data; it
may involve machine learning. It may involve how we relate to others; it may
involve how as individuals we think, remember and reason. It may have implications
for the organisation of the labour market; it may involve how we trade; who has
access to information; and how. It has implications for the economy, for politics, for
culture. It has implications for those who directly use AI, such as those who use a
robot butler; it has implications for those more remote, as for example when an
algorithm developed by machine learning helps makes public policy decisions, or
unemployment attributable to the use of AI means a worker can no longer afford to
pay their child‟s music teacher. Artificial intelligence may be applied in many very
different areas, and in different ways within the same area. In medicine, AI may be
involved in computerised diagnosis of individual patients, or in algorithms to analyse
vast amounts of data from thousands or millions of patients to understand the nature
of disease and health. It may be involved in patient consultations and even therapy
sessions with online or robotic responses. Robotic assistance with surgery can
involve AI, for complex and delicate operations. It may be involved in remote
monitoring of health, in mobile technology that gives patients information about their
11

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

own conditions. It may be involved in nursing and care, with robotic assistants or
companions. Robots are being used to assist people with autism to develop social
skills. Robotic pets are being developed to provide companionship and mental
stimulation to patients with dementia. Robotic limbs are being developed, as well as
devices to enable patients with locked in syndrome and other similar conditions to
communicate. Machinery increasingly involves AI. Autopilots include elements of
AI, and autonomous vehicles are imminently set for widespread use. The „internet of
things‟ connects household gadgets and other items using AI. Commerce involves
AI, from automated trading agents in the stock market, to algorithms which tailor
online advertising or sort the prices of airline tickets, both for buyers and for sellers.
The use of robotics in manufacturing is long established, and capabilities are
increasing. AI is moving into performing work that previously required not just
manual skills but intellectual skills, as in legal research and accounting. Teaching
also faces inroads from AI. AI may even be used in creative endeavours, such in
writing literature; it‟s already being used in the composition of music. There will
hence be many different and complex debates to be had about the perils and benefits
of AI and its applications. How then, should we think about developing any codes of
ethics for AI?
4. Ethical Considerations of AI:
The legal and ethical issues that confront society due to Artificial Intelligence
(AI) include privacy and surveillance, bias or discrimination, and potentially the
philosophical challenge is the role of human judgment. Concerns about newer digital
technologies becoming a new source of inaccuracy and data breaches have arisen as a
result of its use. Mistakes in the procedure or protocol in the field of healthcare can
have devastating consequences for the patient who is the victim of the error. Because
patients come into contact with physicians at moments in their lives when they are
most vulnerable, it is crucial to remember this.

12

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

There is a continuous debate regarding whether AI “fits within existing legal
categories or whether a new category with its special features and implications
should be developed.” The application of AI in clinical practice has enormous
promise to improve healthcare, but it also poses ethical issues that we must now
address. To fully achieve the potential of AI in healthcare, four major ethical issues
must be addressed:
1. Informed consent to use data,
2. Safety and transparency
3. Algorithmic fairness and biases, and
5. Data privacy are all important factors to consider
Whether AI systems may be considered legal is not only a legal one but also a
politically contentious one (Resolution of the European Parliament, 16 February
2017). The aim is to help policymakers ensure that the moral demanding situations
raised by enforcing AI in healthcare settings are tackled proactively. The limitation
of algorithmic transparency is a concern that has dominated most legal discussions on
artificial intelligence. The rise of AI in high-risk situations has increased the
requirement for accountable, equitable, and transparent AI design and governance.
The accessibility and comprehensibility of information are the two most important
aspects of transparency. Information about the functionality of algorithms is
frequently deliberately made difficult to obtain.Our capacity to trace culpability back
to the maker or operator is allegedly threatened by machines that can operate by
unfixed rules and learn new patterns of behaviour. The supposed “ever-widening”
divide is a cause for alarm, as it threatens “both the moral framework of society and
the foundation of the liability idea in law.” The use of AI may leave us without
13

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

anyone to hold accountable for any sort of damage done. The extent of danger is
unknown, and the use of machines will severely limit our ability to assign blame and
take ownership of the decision-making Modern computing approaches can hide the
thinking behind the output of an Artificial Intelligent System (AIS), making
meaningful scrutiny impossible. Therefore, the technique through which an AIS
generates its outputs is “opaque.” A procedure used by an AIS may be so
sophisticated that for a non-technically trained clinical user, it is effectively
concealed while remaining straightforward to understand for a techie skilled in that
area of computer science.AISs, like IBM's Watson for oncology, are meant to support
clinical users and hence directly influence clinical decision-making. The AIS would
then evaluate the information and recommend the patient's care. The use of AI to
assist clinicians in the future could change clinical decision-making and, if adopted,
create new stakeholder dynamics. The future scenario of employing AIS to help
clinicians could revolutionize clinical decision-making and, if embraced, create a
new healthcare paradigm. Clinicians (including doctors, nurses, and other health
professionals) have a stake in the safe roll-out of new technologies in the clinical
setting.The scope of emerging ML-HCAs in terms of what they intend to achieve,
how they might be built, and where they might be used is very broad. ML-HCAs
range from entirely self-sufficient synthetic intelligence diabetic retinopathy
prognosis in primary care settings, to non-self-sufficient death forecasts, to manual
coverage and resource allocation (25). Researchers ought to describe how those
outputs can be included in the research, along with predictions. This information is
essential to setting up the cost of the scientific trial and guiding scientific research
6. Current Initiatives in AI and Ethics
There are so many initiatives currently underway concerning the ethical, social and
legal aspects of AI that it would be a project in itself to list them all. Here I simply
indicate examples of activities from across diverse categories. There are of course
academics from different disciplinary approaches working across many universities,
including dedicated centres, such as the Leverhulme Centre for the Future of
Intelligence at Cambridge and the One Hundred Year Study of AI (AI100) at
Stanford University. Such centres may get funding from a variety of sources. As well
as projects explicitly examining ethical issues in AI, there are also AI projects which
themselves incorporate ethical objectives. These projects show an awareness of the
14

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

potential problems of AI. For example, OpenAI aims to produce open source AI code
under the belief that this is the best way forward to combat possibly malicious use of
AI. The Machine Intelligence Research Institute (MIRI) states its aim as „aligning
advanced AI with human interests‟. Large and smaller corporations also have
initiatives, such as the Partnership on Artificial Intelligence to Benefit People and
Society, with collaboration from Amazon, Deep Mind, Facebook, Google, IBM, and
Microsoft (https://www. partnershiponai.org/); and the non-profit initiative AI Austin
with collaboration between university, City Council and business (https://www.aiaustin.org/). There‟s also work by individuals in the professions, such as research
examining bias in AI recruitment and the development of apps to investigate bias in
algorithms (Clark 2016). Work by government agencies is also underway, such as the
White House Report on the Future of Artificial Intelligence (Executive Office of the
President 2016) and a draft report on robotics and law by the Committee on Legal
Affairs of the European Union (Directorate-General for Internal Policies 2016). Such
governmental work tends to focus on wider societal issues such as employment,
funding and economics, which naturally have ethical implications. There is work by
professional bodies such as the IEEE‟s Standards Association Global Initiative for
Ethical Considerations in the Design of Autonomous Systems, which has a large
number of strands of investigation motivated by their by-line, „Values By Design.‟
This is an ongoing project to produce both industry standards and discussion
documents
on
various
topics
(http://standards.ieee.org/develop/
indconn/ec/autonomous_systems.html). There‟s work by research funding councils
such as the Engineering and Physical Science Research Council (EPSRC)‟s
Principles of Robotics which was produced in 2011 and designed to stimulate
discussion (Boden et al. 2011). There is also work by special interest and pressure
groups from the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots, whose remit is obvious from the
name (https://www. stopkillerrobots.org/), to the #HellNoBarbie campaign fighting
against Hello 1.2 Current Initiatives in AI and Ethics 3 Barbie and other children‟s
toys which can transmit and analyse children‟s conversations remotely (Taylor and
Michael 2016). There are projects funded by non-profit organisations, such as our
project, which is funded, along with 34 other projects, with an AI grant awarded by
the Future of Life Institute. The Future of Life Institute held a 5 day workshop in
January 2017 at Asilomar in California, during which time they drew up a set of
Asilomar AI Principles.
15

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

7 .Ethical Issues with our relationship with artificial Entities:
This chapter is about the ethics of our relationships with artificial entities—
bots, robots, and other computational systems created to interact with us as if they
were sentient and autonomous individuals. They may be embodied as robots or exist
only in software; some are clearly artificial while others are indistinguishable, at least
under certain conditions, from human beings. When are such interactions helpful or
harmful? How do our relationships with computational entities change our
relationships with other human beings? When does it matter if we interact with a
machine or a human, and why?
There Are Three Ethical issues with our relationship with artificial Entities: They are
1. Ethics of Our Relationship with the Seemingly Sentient.
2. Ethics of Creating Seemingly Sentient Entities
3. Sentient Entities as Social Mirror
1. Ethics of Our Relationship with the Seemingly Sentient:
The big-eyed, round-bodied artificial assistant that sits on our counter, playing
music and telling jokes, seems disarmingly innocuous; if we think of it as having
intentions, they are to please us. But when we imagine an actually sentient, conscious
artificial being and its goals and intentions, the narrative tends to darken. To
understand why, we need to turn to another mental quality—intelligence. Vernacular
Western thought pictures the world as hierarchical, with humans on top due to our
superior intelligence. This intelligence has given us fantastic power: we build
bridges, cities, bombs, and transistors; we conquer nature with vaccines, dams, and
insecticides. Our intelligence has given us power over all the other animals, which
we have exploited without hesitation. But while our intelligence gives us the ability
to do these things, it is our consciousness—our awareness of ourselves, our place in
the world, and our future—that has provided the ambition to do so.
2. Ethics of Creating Seemingly Sentient Entities:
We have been focusing thus far on the ethics of our relationships with artificial
entities. We turn now to the process creating these entities, and in particular, of
designing them to seem conscious and aware when they are not. Here, the ethical
questions center on deception. There is an extensive, and contentious, body of work
16

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

about the ethics of deception. The central questions are: What exactly constitutes a
deception? Are all deceptions ethically wrong—and if not, which ones are permitted
and why? For the purpose of this discussion, I will put forth some basic definitions
and ethical premises, so we can focus on the new issues artificial entities raise. An
act or quality is deceptive if it is intended to cause the recipient to believe something
that is not true. Intent is key: not every false statement or causing of false belief is
deceptive. If one believes something that is not true, and tells that untrue thing to
others, that is a mistake, not a deception. If one says something true, but the recipient
misconstrues or misinterprets it that is a misunderstanding, not a deception. Ethical
concerns focus on intentional deceptions. While a mantis that evolved to resemble a
dead leaf is deceptive and this deception harms its predators, it is not unethical, for
the mantis did not choose to deceive. Humans lie deliberately--and so do some
animals; it is a sign of advanced cognition.
Most people (and philosophers) hold more nuanced, if differing, views,
evaluating the ethics of deceptions by the harm they cause. An altruistic deception is
done at one‟s own expense to benefit the other; a selfish deception is done for one‟s
own gain and harming the recipient is an effect but not the goal; a malicious
deception is performed with the goal of harming the recipient. In an ethical calculus
of deception, one might argue that altruistic deceptions are ethical, and ones that
cause harm should be assessed based on the amount of harm caused and the moral
standing of the various parties. A lie to a would-be mass shooter that results in his
capture and saves many lives is by narrow definition a malicious lie, but most people
would agree that it was ethical.
An active and growing field of research seeks to understand how to design
technologies that influence people and compel them to conform and obey. Robots
that “use human-like gazing behaviour” are known to be persuasive—and become
even more so if gestures are added. If a robot does something that induces gratitude,
“the norm of reciprocity compels people to return a favour. People conform when
faced with “active peer pressure” from a group of robots, and “robots have enough
authority to pressure participants, even if they protest, to continue a tedious task for a
substantial amount of time.” The published research cites laudable goals as potential
applications; the technology will help the user stick to a diet, follow crucial
directions, or use environmentally responsible products. Yet there is nothing that
ensures that these powerful techniques will always be used so benevolently.
3. Sentient Entities as Social Mirror:

17

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

The big-eyed, round-bodied artificial assistant that sits on our counter, playing
music and telling jokes, seems disarmingly innocuous; if we think of it as having
intentions, they are to please us. But when we imagine an actually sentient, conscious
artificial being and its goals and intentions, the narrative tends to darken. To
understand why, we need to turn to another mental quality—intelligence. Vernacular
Western thought pictures the world as hierarchical, with humans on top due to our
superior intelligence. This intelligence has given us fantastic power: we build
bridges, cities, bombs, and transistors; we conquer nature with vaccines, dams, and
insecticides. Our intelligence has given us power over all the other animals, which
we have exploited without hesitation. But while our intelligence gives us the ability
to do these things, it is our consciousness—our awareness of ourselves, our place in
the world, and our future—that has provided the ambition to do so.
So long as the machine is merely intelligent, cleverly solving very difficult
problems— problems far too complex for a mere human intelligence to solve—it
does not pose an existential threat to us. It solves the problems simply because that‟s
what it automatically, mindlessly does, much like a bacterium reverses course away
from an obstacle. But if that machine somehow becomes sentient, with preferences
and the drive to achieve them—or conscious, with a sense of self and of the future,
the ingredients for ambition—then it is deeply threatening to us.
Samuel Butler voiced this fear in his 1872 novel Erewhon: “The machines were
ultimately destined to supplant the race of man, and to become instinct with a vitality
as different from, and superior to, that of animals, as animal to vegetable life.” To
prevent this destiny, the people of Erewhon destroyed all machines and banned their
manufacture56. Karel Capek introduced the word “robot” in R.U.R, his 1920 play in
which the robots, provoked by long mistreatment, rise in rebellion and ultimately
annihilates the human race. In the 1967 short story “I Have No Mouth, and I Must
Scream,” Harlan Ellison describes a world in which humanity has been made nearly
extinct by intelligent machines that had been programmed to wage war; the few
humans that remain are tormented by the sadistic and now conscious AIs. Today, the
fear that the machines we make will supplant us echoes in warnings not only from
science fiction writers and technology critics, but from scientists and engineers them.
Physicist Stephen Hawking warned that “The development of full artificial
intelligence could spell the end of the human race”. Along similar lines, inventor
Elon Musk has said “If AI has a goal and humanity just happens to be in the way, it
will destroy humanity as a matter of course without even thinking about it.” It is not
certain that a machine can ever become sentient or conscious; even if it could, it is far
from known by what process or—dystopian terrors aside—what sort of being it will
18

21AD1907

ETHICS AND AI

UNIT-I

be. All the conscious beings we know are living creatures, who evolved over millions
of years through a process that favoured reproductive survival. A machine
consciousness would be vastly different, in ways we cannot predict.

19

