DIGITAL AND MOBILE FORENSICS
UNIT - I INTRODUCTION TO DIGITAL FORENSICS

Forensic Science – Digital Forensics – Digital Evidence – The Digital Forensics Process –
Introduction – The Identification Phase – The Collection Phase – The Examination Phase – The
Analysis Phase – The Presentation Phase

Introduction on Forensic Science
The application of scientific methods to establish factual answers to legal problems. Forensic
science is a branch of science that is widely popularized in fiction and in contemporary media.
Forensic science in its broadest definition is the application of science to law.Whenever two
objects come into contact with one another, there is an exchange of materials between them.
The principle states that “when a person or object comes in contact with another person or
object, a cross-transfer of materials occurs”
Crime reconstruction can help test hypotheses about a possible chain of events. It leverages the
five-step process for event-based crime scene reconstruction.
1) Evidence examination: Identify and characterize evidence relevant to an incident.
2) Role classification: Examine the role of the evidence as a cause or effect of an event.
3) Event construction and testing: Identify events and assess whether they are possible.
4) Event sequencing: Combine events into event chains.
5) Hypothesis testing: The hypothesis is tested using the scientific method.
5WH defines the objectives of an investigation as who, where, what, when, why, and how. The
5WH formula sets the following objectives:
1. Who: Persons involved in the investigation, including suspects, witnesses, and victims
2. Where: The location of the crime and other relevant locations
3. What: Description of the facts of the crime in question
4 When: The time of the crime and other related events
5 Why: The motivation for the crime and why it happened at a given time
6 How: How the crime was committed.

The digital forensic process is a normative approach of conducting digital forensics investigations.
It is primarily grounded on a traditional physical forensics investigation process and includes all
required phases. These phases include the original notification, through the reporting to the final
presentation of the findings.The first principle is evidence integrity, which refers to the
preservation of evidence in its original form. This is a requirement that is equally valid both for the
original evidence when it is collected, as well as for the copy of the evidence that is used for
analysis and then referred to when evidence is presented to a court.
The second principle is chain of custody, or the ability to document all actions done to the evidence
in order to prove its authenticity and integrity.
The first responder in a criminal case is typically a police officer, arriving at a physical scene of an
event, such as at a crime scene. The first responders are the ones responsible for handling potential

evidence, including digital devices. Imagine that you arrive at a crime scene as the first responder,
and there is a hypothesis that someone has committed a crime. Evidence of how it happened, when
it happened, and who did what might be found in the smartphone laying on the counter, on the
compact camera on the shelf, or on the laptop playing music.The ability to document all actions
done to the evidence in order to prove its authenticity and integrity.
Evidence integrity refers to the preservation of evidence in its original form. This is a requirement
that is equally valid both for the original evidence when it is collected, as well as for the copy of
the evidence that is used for analysis and then referred to when evidence is presented to a court.
Cryptographic Hashes: In order to verify evidence integrity is preserved, a concept known as
digital fingerprinting is applied. This involves the use of cryptographic (or oneway) hash
functions. The input to a hash function is a bit stream, which can come from a file, a disk, or a
partition, and the output is the unique hash or signature of that input stream. By comparing the
hashes of an original with those of its respective copy, one can verify that a copy is the exact same
as the original.
Many digital forensics toolkits and software suites come with their own file formats or databases
to store information that has been collected in a structured manner. First and foremost is the raw
data format, which is used to copy the data source “as is.” The more extensive storage formats are
EnCase, SMART, AFF, and Prodiscover. Forensic file formats typically support the most
common data sources, such as block devices, hard disk images, and computer memory.
Forensic science is a branch of science that is widely popularized in fiction and in contemporary
media, ranging from Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s first Sherlock Holmes novel A Study in Scarlet
published in 1887 to today’s CSI and similar crime shows. It is commonly understood that forensic
science is both highly inquisitive, requiring a creative mindset, and formalistic, requiring a strict
adherence to established processes. An authoritative textbook in the field, Criminalistics, states that
“forensic science in its broadest definition is the application of science to law.” The terms
criminalistics and forensic science are used interchangeably, although criminalistics has a stronger
flavor of the services of a crime laboratory.
Forensic Science The application of scientific methods to establish factual answers to legal
problems.
A forensic scientist is responsible for the important task of establishing facts related to questions
such as: what has happened how did it happen, who has been involved, and when did it occur? To
solve such problems, a forensic scientist draws on methods and tools from a wide range of
theoretical and applied sciences, including biology, medicine, physics, geology, computer science,
and electrical engineering. As it is often not possible to answer a problem with full certainty, a
forensic scientist is also trained to apply statistics to express the results in terms of probabilities.
History of Forensic Science
Forensic science was established as a separate scientific domain during the 1800s and early 1900s.
The contributions of this new area of science dramatically changed the effectiveness of law
enforcement. A comprehensive overview of the contributions is available in Saferstein (2007), but
some notable innovators and milestones are:
 Mathieu Orfila (1787–1853), considered the father of forensic toxicology, published the
first scientific text on forensic toxicology in 1814.
 Alphonse Bertillon (1853–1914) developed a method for identification through body
measurements and published a system on personal identification in 1879.
 Francis Galton (1822–1911) studied fingerprints as a means of identification and published

the book Finger Prints in 1892.
 Hans Gross (1847–1915) established the principles for the application of science in
investigations in several publications, the first one in 1893.
 Alberts S. Osborn (1858–1946) established scientific principles for document examination
and published the book Questioned Documents in 1910.
 Leone Lattes (1887–1954) studied characteristics of blood types for identification and
created a method for the analysis of blood groups in blood stains in 1915.
 Edmond Locard (1877–1966), recognized worldwide for promoting the scientific method
in criminal investigation, established a police laboratory in Lyon in 1910.
Locard’s Exchange Principle
Edmond Locard formulated the famous Locard’s exchange principle, which has served as an
important principle for subsequent research within forensic science. The principle states that “when
a person or object comes in contact with another person or object, a cross-transfer of materials
occurs” (Saferstein, 2007). In this way, every criminal can be connected to a crime through trace
evidence. It should, however, be noted that the principle cannot necessarily be directly applied to
digital forensics, as the dynamics of digital evidence is different from that of physical evidence.
Definition 1.2: Locard’s Exchange Principle Whenever two objects come into contact with one
another, there is an exchange of materials between them.
Crime Reconstruction
Crime reconstruction (or crime scene reconstruction) is the process of determining the most likely
hypothesis, or sequence of events, through the application of the scientific method.
Crime Reconstruction by Chisum and Turvey (2008).
Crime Reconstruction Crime reconstruction is the determination of the actions and events
surrounding the commission of a crime. A crime reconstruction can leverage a wide range of
forensic methods, for example firearm ballistics tests, statistical simulations, and biological
experiments. The objective is to establish a hypothesis about the event or sequence of events and
then to test whether the hypothesis is possible or not. If the hypothesis is confirmed,then one
possible explanation has been identified. If it is refuted, then the explanation is not possible and
other hypotheses will have to be considered.
Investigations
An investigation is a systematic examination, typically with the purpose of identifying or verifying
facts. A key objective during investigations is to identify key facts related to a crime or incident, is
referred to as 5WH
5WH defines the objectives of an investigation as who, where, what, when, why, and how. The
5WH formula sets the following objectives (Stelfox, 2013):
1. Who: Persons involved in the investigation, including suspects, witnesses, and victims
2. Where: The location of the crime and other relevant locations
3. What: Description of the facts of the crime in question
4 When: The time of the crime and other related events
5 Why: The motivation for the crime and why it happened at a given time
6 How: How the crime was committed.
Evidence Dynamics
Evidence dynamics is defined as “any influence that adds, changes, relocates, obscures,
contaminates, or obliterates physical evidence, regardless of intent” (Chisum & Turvey, 2000). The
concept is useful in understanding the actual behavior of evidence and plays an important role in
crime scene reconstructions. Although the definition is originally intended for physical evidence, it
is equally applicable to digital evidence. For example, evidence dynamics can describe the
mechanisms for writing to a sector on a hard drive, or the operations for creating, changing, or
deleting a file in a file system.

Evidence Dynamics Evidence dynamics refers to any influence that adds, changes, relocates,
obscures, contaminates, or obliterates evidence, regardless of intent.
Digital Forensics
Digital forensics refers to forensic science applied to digital information, whereas a digital
investigation refers to investigations in the digital domain. Definition from the first Digital
Forensics Research Workshop (Digital Forensics Research Workshop, 2001),
The use of scientifically derived and proven methods toward the preservation, collection,
validation, identification, analysis, interpretation, documentation, and presentation of digital
evidence derived from digital sources for the purpose of facilitating or furthering the reconstruction
of events found to be criminal, or helping to anticipate unauthorized actions shown to be
disruptive to planned operations. Other terms, such as network forensics,device forensics, and
Internet forensics, are often used to label specialized fields within digital forensics. As information
technology has become an integral part of all aspects of society, digital forensics is growing in
importance. Most legal cases today have an aspect of digital forensics, involving for example
mobile phones, credit card transactions, email systems, Internet logs, and GPS systems.
As many types of digital evidence can be volatile and easily manipulated, the trusted preservation
of evidence through the use of standardized forensic tools and methods has become essential. You
may have previously seen references to digital archaeology and digital geology when discussing
digital forensics. Digital archaeology refers to digital traces in computer systems created by human
behavior, whereas digital geology refers to digital traces created by the computer systems
themselves as part of their inherent processes. The goal of digital forensics is usually to gather facts
about human behavior (i.e., digital archaeology), but it is a prerequisite to understand how the
computer systems behave (i.e., digital geology) in order to interpret digital evidence. As forensic
scientists and forensic practitioners, our role in digital forensics is to establish factual answers to
legal problems. This responsibility calls for strong standards for the processing of evidence and for
the soundness of the analysis and its conclusions.
Crimes and Incidents
An important consideration for digital forensics is that it is commonly applied both in criminal law
and in private law. Law enforcement increasingly depends upon digital forensics to process digital
evidence in the context of a crime under investigation, whereas public and private companies and
organizations depend upon digital forensics as a tool for supporting legal action in the case of an
incident (e.g., contract or policy violations). Digital crimes and incidents consist of a digital event
or a sequence of events. The location of the incident is referred to as the scene of the incident, or in
the case of a crime, the digital crime scene. The field of digital forensics addresses with an
emphasis on after-thefact forensic analysis (often referred to as post mortem). Digital forensics can
be initiated by real-time detection of cybersecurity incidents (e.g., intrusion detection) or as part of
security incident handling processes. However, the topics of security monitoring and security
incident management are not addressed in this textbook, as these are separate fields with different
processes, contexts, and objectives.
Digital Devices, Media, and Objects
A central distinction in digital forensics is that between digital devices, digital media, and digital
objects. A digital device is a physical object, such as a laptop, a smartphone, or a car. A digital
device necessarily contains one or more storage media, such as a hard drive or memory, referred to
as digital media. The digital media contain data, stored in binary format, referred to as digital data.
Forensic analysts often work with discrete collections of digital data, referred to as digital objects.
Forensic Soundness and Fundamental Principles
The scientific method refers to the use of “a method or procedure . . . consisting of systematic
observation, measurement, and experiment, and the formulation, testing, and modification of
hypotheses”. Ideally, this should also be the gold standard for digital forensics, with the implication
that any investigation of digital evidence must be entirely reproducible by a third party. However,
our ability to capture digital evidence in real life is far from perfect, and forensic soundness has
therefore come to mean that the professionally recognized principles and standards of digital
forensics are observed.

Forensically Sound An investigation is forensically sound if it adheres to established digital
forensics principles, standards, and processes. The two fundamental principles are evidence
integrity and chain of custody. Evidence integrity refers to the preservation of evidence in a
complete form without any intentional or unintentional changes,
Evidence Integrity Evidence integrity refers to the preservation of evidence in its original form.
While evidence integrity is an ideal in digital forensics, it is often not achievable, as data inevitably
changes in live computer systems and networks during investigations. Due to this, documentation
of all steps in the investigation is an important objective.
Chain of Custody Chain of custody refers to the documentation of acquisition, control, analysis,
and disposition of physical and electronic evidence. It should be noted that there are, of course,
many other important principles in digital forensics, some of which are extensively discussed in
this textbook. We have chosen to adopt these two principles as fundamental principles that should
be observed throughout all phases of the digital forensics process.
Crime Reconstruction in Digital Forensics Crime reconstruction can help test hypotheses about a
possible chain of events. It leverages the five-step process for event-based crime scene
reconstruction.
1) Evidence examination: Identify and characterize evidence relevant to an incident.
2) Role classification: Examine the role of the evidence as a cause or effect of an event.
3) Event construction and testing: Identify events and assess whether they are possible.
4) Event sequencing: Combine events into event chains.
5) Hypothesis testing: The hypothesis is tested using the scientific method.
The method can also be applied in the case of digital forensics through the use of physical or
virtual testbeds set up to perform simulated experiments
Digital Evidence
Central to any digital investigation is the notion of digital evidence.
Digital evidence is defined as any digital data that contains reliable information that can
support or refute a hypothesis of an incident or crime. In digital forensics, we aim to process
and store digital evidence in a way that is consistent with the principles of evidence integrity
and chain of custody. A number of digital evidence storage and exchange formats have been
developed to support this, but close attention to a manual process and detailed documentation
of the chain of custody are nonetheless required.
1 Layers of Abstraction: It is useful to view digital evidence in the context of layers of
abstraction. This refers to the practice, used in all areas of computing, of hiding
implementation details of higher layers of abstraction in order to reduce complexity. A forensic
analyst has to analyze and reconstruct data at all layers of abstraction to be able to extract and
explain relevant digital evidence. For example, a forensic analyst may have to analyze data at
the binary level of a disk drive to reconstruct a text file that contains an email with content
relevant to the investigated case. A well-known example from computer networks is the Open
Systems Interconnection (OSI) reference model, which divides network protocols into seven
layers of abstraction
2 Metadata Metadata is a valuable source of evidence in digital forensics that will be
thoroughly discussed in this textbook. Metadata, or data about data, contains information about
data objects. For example, the metadata associated with a digital photograph can contain the
time of taking the photo, the geographical location, and the camera used. The analysis of
metadata is an important activity throughout the forensic process, as metadata can contain
information that is key to solving a case.
3 Error, Uncertainty, and Loss Other aspects of digital evidence that have to be understood
by a forensic scientist are error, uncertainty, and loss. Such uncertainties can impact the
interpretation of timestamps, geographical location, and authorship or ownership of data. This
must be understood in the context of evidence dynamics in order to accurately interpret and
present digital evidence in a legal context. Failure to do so can lead to a weakened or lost case
in court, or even the wrongful conviction of an innocent.

4 Online Bank Fraud – A Real-World Example To better facilitate learning across the topics
covered in this textbook, we will refer to the real-world online bank fraud example of SpyEye.
This case is particularly relevant for us, as it is both legally and technically complex, with
relevance to all the chapters in this textbook. The case is well documented, as it has been
investigated by the US Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and tried in public court with
broad media coverage. The hackers behind the malware were recently convicted to a total of 24
years in prison.
Example 1: Modus Operandi Online bank fraud is a well-known crime pattern in which a
large number of computers are compromised and infected with Trojan malware, allowing their
computers to be monitored and remote controlled. The computers are part of a network of
infected computers – a botnet – and typically controlled by one or more command-and-control
centers. Once established, the botnet is continuously monitored to gather personal information
and credentials, and to establish an overview of the online bank accounts accessed by the
victims through the compromised computers.

At some point during a regular online bank session, when a victim is active, the command-and-
control center issues an instruction to initiate a transaction of a specific amount of money from

a victim’s account. The Trojan malware, having circumvented the security of the online
banking session, fools the unsuspecting victim to authenticate and authorize the transaction.
When such an illegitimate transaction is completed, an amount of money is transferred to a
complicit third party – a money mule – whose primary task is typically to withdraw the money
and transfer it to a (possibly foreign) account in a jurisdiction that is more forgiving to
financial fraud and cybercrime.
The crime pattern involves multiple actors and a long-term commitment, requiring a criminal
organization with access to highly specialized competencies and tools. Central actors in such
schemes are thus the malware programmers, the commandand-control center managers, the
mules, as well as the organization that is recruiting the mules and profiting from the operation.
Access to the required botnet, consisting of the command-and-control center and a network of
compromised computers with active malware, can be purchased as a service on underground
forums. The victims are both the online bank customers and the financial institutions.
Example 2: The SpyEye Case The SpyEye case closely followed this pattern, infecting 50
million computers worldwide and compromising at least 10,000 bank accounts. The convicted
programmers responsible for the malware and botnets, Aleksandr Andreevich Panin
(“Gribodemon”) of Russia and Hamza Bendelladj (“Bx1”) of Algeria, were subsequently
sentenced to a total of 24 years in prison for causing losses to financial institutions and
individuals of close to a billion US dollars. One of Panin’s clients reportedly made $3.2 million
in 6 months. Due to the scale and complexity of the case, law enforcement agencies from
several countries were involved in the investigations, supported by cybersecurity experts from
the private sector. From a technical perspective, the investigation ranged from the forensic
analysis of a large number of infected computers, to online investigations of their distribution
and sale in underground forums, and to tracing and identifying the perpetrators and malware
where forensics is complicated by obfuscation and anti-forensic countermeasures.

Digital forensic and digital evidence
All three terms - digital forensics, computer forensics, and mobile device forensics - deal with
recovering and analyzing digital evidence, but they have some key distinctions:
Digital Forensics:
 This is the umbrella term encompassing the recovery and investigation of digital evidence
from any electronic device.
 It includes computer forensics, mobile device forensics, network forensics (examining
network traffic), cloud forensics (data stored in the cloud), and even embedded device
forensics (e.g., digital cameras).
 Digital forensics establishes the principles and methodologies for handling evidence in a
legally sound manner, ensuring its admissibility in court.

Computer Forensics:
 This is a subfield of digital forensics that specifically focuses on recovering evidence
from desktop and laptop computers.
 Traditional computer forensics primarily deals with hard drives and solid-state drives
(SSDs), but may also include peripherals like USB drives.
 Techniques used in computer forensics are well-established and often involve creating
forensic copies of storage devices to avoid altering the original evidence.
Mobile Device Forensics:
 This is another subfield of digital forensics that concentrates on extracting evidence
from mobile devices like smartphones and tablets.
 Mobile devices present unique challenges due to their volatile nature (data can be easily
overwritten) and the variety of operating systems and encryption methods employed.
 Mobile device forensics specialists use specialized tools and techniques to recover deleted
data, analyze application activity, and extract information from SIM cards and other
components.
identification phase
The Identification Phase Incidents can be identified based on complaints, alerts, or other
indications. The identification phase forms the basis for all the following phases or activities
during the digital investigation. For example, it can be used to identify which evidence or
objects to look for during the investigation.

The identification of an incident or a crime leads to the formation of a hypothesis about what
might have happened. An investigation can focus on identifying supporting information to
prove a case, identifying information that refutes a case, or verifying the validity of any given
information. The questions defined by the 5WH model should always be raised during the
identification phase. They help us to establish a hypothesis based on the information triggering
the investigation. As investigators, we operate with a preliminary hypothesis about a digital
device or system that may contain potential digital evidence. In the case of computer and file
system analysis, the identification step includes making a determination about which files on a
volume are available, active, or deleted.
The Identification Phase The task of detecting, recognizing, and determining the incident or
crime to investigate.
1 Preparations and Deployment of Tools and Resources Proper planning helps prevent poor
performance or substandard results in an investigation, and it is a precondition for an efficient
and effective investigation. This is applicable for investigations of all types of incidents,
including digital crimes. The event-based digital investigation process is as a well-established
reference in the field. Law enforcement agencies, digital forensic units, and corporate
investigators all need to be well prepared before a crime or incident even occurs. A trained
team of investigators is crucial for determining what occurred, based on the digital objects at
hand. The ability to have access to such a team depends, of course, on the resources available.
Since no two cases are the same, it can be difficult to make decisions on investigative resource
allocation.
A readily available investigative infrastructure, such as a lab and available tools, is an
advantage when making such decisions. Guidelines and principles for building a forensics
laboratory are presented in Watson and Johnson (2013).
Many commercial vendors and open source communities provide toolkits and digital
forensics platforms to be used for investigations. The choice of tools depends on the resources
available and the ambition and objective of the agency or unit. The forensic soundness of the

tools must be assessed, as they have to support the principles of evidence integrity and chain of
custody. For a physical crime scene, readiness can range from fingerprint analysis to DNA
profiling to any special-purpose imaging equipment for recording the layout of a physical
scene. For cases involving electronic devices, it may include tasks such as the setup and
configuration of digital forensics software and hardware. All preparations done before the
investigation are part of the preparation phase.
A digital crime scene has been classified as a sub-environment of a physical crime scene.
In an example, a computer located beside a dead body may play a part in an investigation. A
digital crime scene requires investigation of the hardware, software, and data that may hold
digital evidence. It is an iterative activity, as multiple physical devices may be found and
investigated sequentially. An important component of the digital crime scene investigation
phase is an understanding of the forensic and core processes for sound investigations. We can
generalize the physical and digital crime scene concept to be applicable also for those scenes of
incidents that produce corporate investigations, where a policy has been breached. When an
incident is recognized, a confirmation is generally required to authorize and initiate a forensic
investigation. For example, if the investigation includes critical IT systems or services, then a
corporation may have to authorize the investigator’s access to the potential evidence sources.
Additionally, if these systems are operational, then special care must be taken and the
investigation activities must be coordinated with the system owner. In criminal cases, seizure
of physical items with digital data is performed by law enforcement personnel with appropriate
search warrants. It is generally recommended that they are trained in the seizure of digital
evidence, or that they consult with digital forensics experts in order to ensure none of the
seized evidence is compromised. What can be seized in respect to legal and ethical
perspectives must be considered at the scene of the event.
2 The First Responder The first responder in a criminal case is typically a police officer,
arriving at a physical scene of an event, such as at a crime scene. The first responders are the
ones responsible for handling potential evidence, including digital devices. Imagine that you
arrive at a crime scene as the first responder, and there is a hypothesis that someone has
committed a crime. Evidence of how it happened, when it happened, and who did what might
be found in the smartphone laying on the counter, on the compact camera on the shelf, or on
the laptop playing music. Perhaps there is even additional evidence at an unknown physical
location in a cloud service. All scenes are different, and so are the digital devices that might be
relevant to the case in question. The digital objects found on one device might not be the sole
source of evidence, or it might not be enough to bring a case to court or convict anyone of a
crime. Other evidence sources thus need to be accounted for, reinforcing the need to have a
complete perspective of the scene of the event you are investigating. As an aid to the first
responder, standard operating procedures (SOPs) should be in place to provide structured
evidence identification activities, including documentation, to maintain evidence integrity
3 At the Scene of the Incident A scene of an incident is simply the location (or set of
locations) where an incident took place or evidence is found. With respect to a digital scene in
an incident, it is important to understand typical characteristics of a traditional physical scene
or the origin of where we believe it (being a crime, incident, or event) all started. A great deal
of digital evidence can be found in a private home, as illustrated in Figure 2.4. Many of these
devices communicate using wireless networks, which in turn connect to other devices outside
the physical premises of the residence. Furthermore, adversaries may also access the network,
especially where there is a lack of adequate network access control. In addition, extended
digital evidence sources such as cloud storage and common email services may be present and
linked to individuals with access to the residence.
3.1 Preservation Tasks The processing of potential evidence normally starts during the
identification phase, and it is crucial to preserve the chain of custody and evidence integrity
from the very start. This includes activities to isolate, secure, and document the physical and
digital devices at hand. Evidence preservation may require the assessment of technologies for
subsequent copying of the original media, establishing time synchronization, and any other
tasks that facilitate additional forensic activities. The documentation activities begin from the
moment the investigator starts handling the digital devices that will be “touched” during the

investigation phases. The documentation enables reproducibility of results and traceability
from the physical object’s origin to the final evidence presentation. This calls for thorough
documentation throughout the digital forensic process.
4 Dealing with Live and Dead Systems Physical equipment that holds potential digital
evidence is identified either as live (turned on) or dead (turned off, with no power):
 By live systems, we mean systems that are running and are at the time of identification
potentially holding evidence that may be lost or hard to acquire if the system is shut down.
 By dead systems, we mean systems not running. Any data in temporary storage areas such
as cache, main memory, running processes, or active application dialogues on a computer
will normally be lost when the system is powered down.
Definition 2.2: Post Mortem Post mortem analysis is, in the context of digital forensics,
associated with analysis of a “dead” (not running) computer or electronic device.
Turning on a system that was initially turned off might also lead to evidence loss. At boot time,
a PC, mobile phone, or media player executes boot activities that can overwrite previously
cached data. Cell phones, media players, laptops, or any devices that can communicate over
any network can potentially be altered while being seized or even after they have been seized.
This can be caused by either deliberate tampering or unintentional changes (e.g., due to
humidity or electricity). Because of this, one should consider the use of containers that can
shield the device from external radiofrequency (RF) sources, such as a Faraday bag.
5 Chain of Custody If we have identified a removable storage media, which we believe has
something to do with a crime. We must ensure that we first copy (or “clone”) the raw data from
the device before we can start searching for evidence of the crime in question. To ensure that
we do not alter or change the data stored on the device during the copying process, we can use
read-only mode when accessing the data. In turn, this can be enforced through software or
hardware that is typically known as write-blocking technology. This ensures that the copy
represents the exact same data as was stored on the media. Only then can we be sure that what
we find while analyzing the copy will match what can be found on the original. The
documentation of these tasks is crucial to preserving the chain of custody. After copying, we
generate a digital signature of the storage media by using a cryptographic hash function. By
computing a digital signature both for the original storage media and for the copy, we can
compare them to verify that the content is identical. This is important information that supports
the chain of custody and evidence integrity. It means that we can continue the investigation on
a copy, but still confidently refer back to the original source. All changes, such as copying,
case information, and information about how it was collected and who was involved, must be
documented. Multiple tools can be used to collect the data and to generate a hash to avoid any
uncertainties in the tools used (referred to as dual-tool verification). Most digital forensics tools
have reporting capabilities. These reports are often incorporated into or appended to case
reports. Digital forensics software and tools can also provide automated reports, which
typically reflect changes made by an investigator while using the tool. Most tools also support
forms that the investigator must fill out, related to the case and the investigated physical or
digital object in question. At a minimum, the documented information should cover the
following:
 the person handling the evidence;
 processes and procedures performed;
 the time and date of evidence acquisition;
 original location of the evidence collected;
 method of collection, examination, and analysis; and
 the reason for collecting the evidence.
Intentional (tampering) or unintentional (accidental) changes to digital evidence, as for
physical evidence, is a risk in any digital investigation. In order to maintain the integrity of the
evidence, precautions should be taken to ensure that the tools used for acquisition,
examination, and analysis of data will not modify it in any unexpected way. To ensure the
chain of custody, the use of integrity checks and timestamps of forensic activities should be
applied. Various kinds of supporting data and documents may be used for supporting the chain

of custody, for example:
 photographs,
 reports,
 laboratory information management systems,
 notebooks,
 checklists,
 log files, and
 videos and screen captures.
The chain of custody is a critical element of the digital forensics process, as we shall see in
later sections of this chapter. In some jurisdictions, evidence could be excluded from a case
(deemed not admissible) if the vital elements of the chain of custody listed here are not
documented.
Analysis Phase
In the analysis phase, forensic investigators determine the digital objects to be used as digital
evidence to support or refute a hypothesis of a crime, incident, or event.
Definition 2.7: The Analysis Phase the processing of information that addresses the objective of
the investigation with the purpose of determining the facts about an event, the significance of the
evidence, and the person(s) responsible. Following the examination phase, the data is prepared for
analysis. Statistical methods, manual analysis, techniques for understanding protocols and data
formats, linking of multiple data objects (e.g., through the use of data mining), and time lining are
some of the techniques that are used for analysis. Computational methods are applied for the
purpose of automating analysis tasks and for recognizing patterns through machine learning. As for
all other investigative phases, the chain of custody is also important for the preservation and
traceability of the collected data in the analysis phase. The analysis phase is an iterative process in
itself. We often operate with preliminary hypotheses about data that may potentially contain
evidence, but during the analysis one forms new hypotheses about the case that may require
collection of additional data objects. Investigations proceed in this manner until the results can be
considered sufficient for the purpose of the investigation, though in many cases this might be
practically infeasible.
1. Layers of Abstraction What you see is not always what you get. One has to recognize this as a
fact when analyzing digital media, regardless of the storage media chosen. In the case of file
system forensics, data seen by an application is not the same as what is seen by an operating
system and, again, not the same as what is actually stored in bits and bytes on the storage device. A
deleted file, for example, can be fragmented over multiple sectors of a hard drive, and new files
might overwrite some of the sectors fully or partially. However, this does not mean that one cannot
get access to those sectors or even parts of sectors that have not yet been overwritten.
2. Evidence Types Any case will have its own evidence, depending on the type of crime. For
example, the evidence of a physical crime, where clues regarding the motivation of the crime can
be found in a digital device owned by the suspect or the victim will be much different from the
evidence of a cybercrime conducted from a computer. Imagine investigating a case where a
computer has been seized for you to analyze. Examples of potential evidence can be the
information found in an email file, such as a message that was sent from a specific email address.
The address can then be linked to one person and sent to another person’s email. Another example
can be a malicious application that was found installed on a system unbeknownst to the person
owning that system. The Trojan horse defense is a well-known concept intended to complicate
digital forensics investigations. To prove or disprove the validity of a Trojan horse defense requires
thorough analysis.
3. String and Keyword Searches String and keyword searches may simplify the analysis. This is
a targeted analysis technique that can be used if one knows what to look for. Imagine an illegal
drug case where the investigation was triggered based on a reported crime with specific
information about a person and a certain drug or its code name. The name of the person or the drug
can be used as a keyword to search through the potential evidence media sources. Keyword
searches can be automated or scripted with the use of forensic tools. Pattern matching is a similar

method that can be applied. Depending on the scope and the task of an investigation, some patterns
can be more interesting than others. For example, Social Security numbers can be relevant for
identity theft cases, and account numbers or credit card numbers for fraud cases. Regular
expressions are used to automate the search for all strings with the pattern that you are searching
for. Consider an electronic fraud case where one has information about bank accounts, credit card
numbers, IP addresses, and URLs. These parameters can be searched for by using regular
expressions. If some of the identifiers are known, then the values can be directly searched for to
identify whether any of these values were present in the system or device analyzed. Other search
properties or regular expressions of interest can be:
1. Phone numbers;
2. Social Security numbers (SSNs);
3. addresses (IP, email, and physical home or work, along with website URLs);
4. file properties such as name, type, size, date of creation, and when accessed;
5. special language and characters; and
6. religious, cultural, or social relations and characteristics.
4. Anti-Forensics Due to the ever-increasing storage capacity of modern digital devices, digital
forensics is comprehensive and challenging work by itself. However, certain techniques are used to
make forensic analysis of digital evidence even harder. These are known as anti-forensics, which
refers to a deliberate attempt to increase the difficulty of performing digital forensics by
eliminating or reducing the ability to access evidence.
4.1. Computer Media Wiping Both corporations and criminals apply wiping tools with the
purpose of obliterating data. For companies, these techniques are used to reduce the risk
represented by hard drives and other media containing sensitive corporate information when
outside their control. Another typical example of wiping, used by both corporations and personal
users, is remote wiping of lost or stolen devices. The degree of how much data may be permanently
removed varies among the techniques and tools used. These tools can be both software and
hardware based, functioning on different levels of the target: file level, device level, or component
level.
4.2 Analysis of Encrypted and Obfuscated Data Malware developers have for a long time
utilized anti-forensics mechanisms and techniques. This makes forensic analysis of both the
functionality and origin of malicious software difficult. Encryption of configuration files is a
typical technique, especially for botnet malware where the botnet masters want to avoid breaches
of the command-andcontrol mechanisms used to control the bots. As forensic analysts, we should
separate the use of encryption for anti-forensics purposes from the use of encryption to secure data.
Corporations may encrypt digital devices to avoid a data breach when a device is stolen. In this
case, there are typically recovery keys centrally stored to recover the files if necessary. These keys
may be accessed by forensic analysts, provided that authorization is provided. In contrast, where
criminals have used encryption, the investigator may not be able to acquire or recover the keys
without obtaining the passwords from the owner of the digital device.
Steganography is another technique that can be used to complicate forensic analysis. This can
be done by a range of data-hiding or steganography applications by storing files in nontraditional
storage locations, changing file formats, or including a hidden message in photographs to avoid
suspicion.
5 Automated Analysis Large data volumes, obfuscated malware, and techniques to remove their
traces make it time-consuming, costly, and difficult for forensic personnel to identify and analyze
relevant evidence. This is especially difficult when evidence is present over a large collection of
computers, Computational forensics, discusses methods for analyzing large amounts of data or
highly unstructured datasets that are otherwise difficult to analyze manually. Data mining,
especially link-mining techniques, can be applied to the large and complex datasets collected
during investigations. Manual analysis is time-consuming, and analysts often develop scripts and
program code to automate their tasks, such as when they search for relevant forensic artifacts.
Digital forensic tools are being introduced with more forensic analytics capabilities to reduce the
manual efforts of analyzing large data volumes.

6. Timelining of Events Timelining is a powerful tool for forensic analysis and contextual
awareness. Many forensic tools can automatically structure files and data based on the time they
were accessed, last changed, or deleted. Figure 2.18 shows an example of a file timeline using
Autopsy, based on when each file was last modified. Whether timestamps can be linked to a digital
object depends on the metadata tied to the object. In file system forensics, timestamp metadata is
generally available. A timeline of a chain of events can include physical events, as well as digital
events. Imagine a case where a murder has been committed and you investigate the cell phone of
the victim. The activity revealed on the cell phone, such as call logs, can provide relevant evidence
related to the timeline of the crime. Analyzing system and application logs can provide a structured
chain of events in time. Logs are useful when trying to trace recent or past activities and system
behavior related to system users or abnormal users. The content of such logs may vary and depends
on the log’s primary purpose. For example, for critical systems that require a high level of
protection, firewall, or intrusion detection, system logs may reveal the potential origin of a
cyberattack. Legal and commercial requirements often exist to ensure that corporations are able to
quickly ascertain the chain of events when an incident or crime occurs.
7. Graphs and Visual Representations The relationships between data objects, individuals, files,
and network interactions are all easier to grasp when presented graphically. Many applications and
tools exist to present data in a visual manner that is based on a set of common attributes, such as
email addresses found across a set of digital devices related to a crime or an incident. Visualizing
the sending and receiving entities of those emails may reveal that one entity was more involved
than others, or is even the hub of all communication with all other entities.
8. Link Analysis Link analysis is a powerful and emerging discipline in digital forensics. The goal
of link analysis is to produce a structured presentation of interconnected and linked objects. One
can gain a better understanding of the relationships and associations among them when links are
visualized in graphs, for example where nodes in the graph represent entities and objects. Link
analysis is a valuable tool for digital forensics, law enforcement, and intelligence, as illustrated in
Figure 2.19 using the tool Maltego. It is also frequently applied in the field of social networks, the
World Wide Web (e.g., interconnected by hyperlinks), medical domains, and financial and
bibliographic domains.

Steps in collection phase
In a digital forensics investigation, the collection phase refers to the acquisition or copying of
the data. This is when a forensic investigator gains access to the electronic device(s) containing
raw data that has been identified as relevant for the specific case. The collection phase of the
digital forensics process is common to most literature and scientific research in digital
forensics. The majority of literature that discusses the forensics process uses the term
collection, whereas more technically oriented literature refers to an acquisition and/or
extraction.

The data being investigated should always be copied to a separate media, and the forensic
examination and analysis should always work on a copy. This ensures that there are no accidental
data changes to the original during the forensic process. In addition, a write blocker (either in
hardware or in software) is typically employed to guarantee that no data is written to the original
storage media. Finally, a digital signature (a cryptographic hash) is calculated both for the original
media and for the copy. To support a forensically sound collection, the Digital Forensics Workshop
2001 jointly stated the importance of collecting relevant data using approved methods. On the basis
of the concepts and tasks addressed.
Definition: The Collection Phase Collection of data from digital devices to make a digital copy
using forensically sound methods and techniques. Metadata about a case should be tied to the
potential evidence, whether it be a physical device or a data file. Such metadata can include the
case name, case number, examiner (the digital forensics investigator or investigators), timestamps,
case and seizure location, and time zone.
Whether data is easy to acquire or not depends in part on whether systems or services have already
been prepared for the logging of events and storing or preserving data that will be used in a
forensic investigation. If this is the case, potential digital evidence can be quickly made ready for
use in a forensic investigation. This kind of preparedness is known as forensic readiness. Errors,
uncertainty, and data loss are common challenges in digital investigations. The data collected will
form the basis of information used for the later process phases. Because of this, carefully
documenting all the factors that may introduce uncertainty, such as the origin of the collected data,
the context of the case, or the location or context in which the digital device was found can help
support further understanding the data collected.

1. Sources of Digital Evidence

Digital evidence includes any digital data that contains reliable information that supports or refutes
a hypothesis about an incident. In today’s society, digital evidence can be found almost
everywhere, and one could write a lengthy separate chapter with taxonomy of all possible digital
evidence sources. We choose to focus on the most well-known sources of digital evidence, to serve
as a reference and an inspiration for where one may find digital evidence. The most common
source of evidence has traditionally been hard drives or other computer long-term storage media.
An example of a hard disk and flash storage drives, main memory, GPU (graphics processing unit)
memory, or a CPU with a cache, are all examples of this. Additional examples are external devices
that can be connected to a computer, such as removable media, memory sticks, web cameras, and
CDs, DVDs, and Blu-rays. Embedded devices can have removable and integrated storage media
with proprietary connectors and physical interfaces. Imagine a memory chip from a
remotecontrolled central garage opener, often used in apartment buildings with devices themselves
(such as web servers and consumer devices), along with the Internet services accessed. The
Internet, the services and applications it offers, along with all users and companygenerated data
(blogs, online shops, forums, and chat services) provide additional sources of evidence.
2. Systems Physically Tied to a Location
In many cases, it is not possible to move, or remove, a system or digital device from its physical
location. In such cases, the data needs to be copied at the physical location itself. A typical crime or
incident could involve emails from a central corporate email server. The email server will, in most
cases, not be removed from its physical location just because of one single email. It is up to the
case investigators to determine if it is necessary to physically remove the digital device, in this case
the email server.
3. Multiple Evidence Sources In an investigation, it is rare that all potential digital evidence is
present in a single digital storage device, such as a computer hard disk or a memory card. Relative
to the case investigated, potential digital evidence can be present in multiple devices in one
physical location or in several locations across the world.
4. Reconstruction The collected media (or hardware) that stores data can be intentionally damaged
by suspects trying to destroy evidence, or unintentionally, for example in a fire or accident. It is
important to be aware of the fact that one cannot always expect to start copying data right away.
5. Evidence Integrity and Cryptographic Hashes Evidence integrity is at the core of every
forensic investigation. This is a requirement that is applied equally to both the original evidence as
well as the copy used for analysis. In order to preserve evidence integrity, multiple factors must be
considered, such as the integrity of individuals and the processes followed, both physically and
logically. There are multiple measures to ensure evidence integrity in digital forensics. The intent is
to ensure that evidence is neither accidentally nor intentionally changed when collecting digital
data from an original source.
Evidence integrity can be facilitated by using hardware or software write blockers, which protect
the data source from anything but read access. There are software-based write blockers that
typically restrict access rights in software to read-only. For example, in UNIX, read-only can be set
for each file or a partition in order to preserve evidence integrity. In order to verify that integrity is
preserved, a concept known as digital fingerprinting is applied. This involves the use of
cryptographic (or oneway) hash functions. The input to a hash function is a bit stream, which can
come from a file, a disk, or a partition, and the output is the unique hash or signature of that input
stream. By comparing the hashes of an original with those of its respective copy, one can verify
that a copy is the exact same as the original.
Examples of cryptographic hash algorithms include MD5, SHA1, and SHA256. It should be noted
that cryptographic algorithms become outdated over time, due to vulnerabilities in the algorithms,
advances in cryptanalysis, and ever-increasing processing power. Both the MD5 and SHA1
functions have been found to be vulnerable to certain attacks, but they are still in widespread use in
forensic tools.
Definition 2.4: Cryptographic Hash A cryptographic hash function is a nonreversible
mathematical function that takes an arbitrary amount of data as input and returns a fixed-size string
as output. The result is a hash value, and it is mathematically infeasible to find two different files
that create the same hash. Be aware that in some cases, data inevitably changes during acquisition.

An example is the case of a live computer system with multiple evidence sources that have
different levels of volatility. In some cases, memory may have to be accessed in order to acquire a
password, for the purpose of opening an encrypted archive file. The evidence integrity of the
memory will not be preserved, and the activities required to access the memory, along with the
chosen procedure and why, must be documented as part of the chain of custody.
6. Order of Volatility Investigations rarely involves just one single digital device. Evidence may
be present across multiple devices, such as a workstation, memory stick, and Internet email service.
By analogy, if we apply the Heisenberg Principle of uncertainty to digital forensics, it is not just
difficult but impossible to gather all the information from a computer system without changing its
state. For example, data acquisition from one data source in a live computer may impact the data in
another. Because of this, the term order of volatility (OOV) has become a central term in digital
forensics.
Definition 2.5: Order of Volatility Prioritization of the potential evidence source to be collected
according to the volatility of the data. We understand that the order of volatility deals with data
lifetimes. It is the concept of gathering the most volatile data first, as it will most likely be changed
or destroyed first. Any operation will, however, affect data. This means that one has to carefully
consider the context and goal of what to extract first to avoid damaging potentially crucial
evidence. Data stored on disk is less volatile than data stored in memory. In cases where only data
on a disk is to be extracted in a postmortem investigation, extraction of data from this media will
be prioritized.

Table 2.1, lists typical storage devices and media and their expected data longevity (the life
expectancy of the data stored) in a running system. All lifetimes depend upon the influence of
external factors, such as the use of the media, the SLA (service-level agreement) for cloud storage,
or magnetic-field influences on tape media. In practice, it is difficult to determine what source is
likely to be the most valuable. If time is critical, one may choose to pay less attention to the
volatility perspective based on the situation, the crime in question, and the hypothesis of where
relevant evidence can be found. Imagine that you are investigating a crime where you are presented
with a live computer that may hold vital evidence for the crime in question. You do not know
where the evidence can be found or what data you need. For example, the evidence you need might
not be stored locally on the machine, but in encrypted cloud storage with encryption keys stored in
a computer’s RAM. Shutting down the machine will destroy the keys. In order to access the most
relevant data, we need to consider different factors before starting the collection process. Some
methods have a given probability of succeeding for a given type of information. As shown in
below Table 2.2, we can look at this as a matrix of information availability, where each factor
affects the availability of the acquired information.

7. Dual-Tool Verification
Digital forensics is conducted using software applications and tools, often made by third parties.
This is because data is preferably analyzed at higher layers of abstraction to make it easier to
understand for the investigator. An investigator must trust the technology to present the
information with a high level of data integrity. Dual-tool verification can be applied as a means to
detect errors from one tool by using another tool to confirm the results. For example, during a
forensic investigation, an investigator is extracting evidence from a broken memory stick. Through
the use of an imaging tool to acquire a copy of the memory stick’s data storage, only 70% of the
original storage space is collected. In order to check if a human or software error was the cause of
this, another imaging tool could be used and the results compared. If there is a deviation between
the results, further analysis will be needed to understand the root cause. In cases where dual-tool
verification is conducted, tools from different vendors or organizations should be used to avoid any
common vendor weaknesses or interference between the tools’ capabilities. Dual-tool verification
can be valuable in all phases of the digital forensics process, not just in the collection phase.
8. Remote Acquisition
Physical collection is not always feasible as it often requires traveling to a location to identify and
collect devices of interest, such as the hard drives of a set of computers. Remote forensic
acquisition can increase the speed of the investigation and reduce expenses. Furthermore, the more
time it takes to arrive on-site and begin the collection, the more data may be lost. In case of data
stored in cloud services, it may not be practically feasible or even possible for an investigator to
enter a data center. There are several important considerations that are worth noting, including:
 To enable remote acquisition, software will have to be installed on devices or systems to
support remote acquisition.
 Data must be transmitted over a network, which can breach confidentiality, integrity, and
availability.
 Trust is reduced as we are not in possession of the physical device and a complete
collection of data may be infeasible.
 It is dependent upon the hardware of the device as tools are running on the IT.
Many forensic software vendors include remote forensics capabilities in their tools, such as
Guidance Software (EnCase), Accessdata (FTK), and FireEye. An investigator can also collect data
by secure shell access (SSH) or Powershell. These tools along with an incident response capability
in an IT security department of a company provide quicker response times to initiate forensic
analysis of devices in remote locations. Remote acquisition can also be applicable in cases where

you have physical possession of the device of interest. Remote forensics laboratory tools can
transmit binary copies of collected data from one device to another. Netcat is one tool that is often
used for this purpose. Data should be hashed before it is sent over a network, to verify the evidence
integrity when it is received and to support the chain of custody. Most people who use the web
today use cloud services. These can be common email services, file storage services, social media
(such as Facebook and Twitter), and corporate services hosted online in locations far removed from
the users. The legal aspects of cloud services investigations are complex and can restrict access to
potential evidence. Service providers may provide their services from foreign physical locations
that are subject to laws of countries other than the one where the actual crime is believed to
originate from.
9. External Competency and Forensics Cooperation In global or multinational criminal cases,
the involvement of forensics units in other countries can be necessary to solve a case. The Internet
poses a unique challenge for digital forensics investigations. Cybercrime is one type of crime that
can rarely be solved by police investigators from only one country, as the origin of the attack can
be in one country, but the crime has an effect in another country. Arenas for global cooperation
include Interpol, Europol, Eurojust, the G8 Subgroup on High Tech Crime, as well as bilateral and
multilateral relations.
In the case of SpyEye, many national law enforcement agencies were involved from all around
the world. In addition, commercial security companies were part of the investigation of the
malware and evidence identified on compromised machines and servers.

Examination Phase
All data collected must be examined and prepared for later analysis as part of the examination
phase. As with all phases in the digital forensics process, it is important to document your
actions and handling of the data to support the chain of custody. The examination often
requires restructuring, parsing, and preprocessing of raw data to make it understandable for a
forensic investigator in the upcoming analysis. To facilitate this phase, an analyst typically uses
forensic tools and techniques appropriate for extracting relevant information. As stated in
ISO/IEC 27041:2015 (ISO/IEC, 2015a), we are attempting to “retrieve relevant potential
digital evidence from one or more sources.”
Definition 2.6: The Examination Phase Preparation and extraction of potential digital
evidence from collected data sources

2.4.1 Initial Data Source Examination and Preprocessing A copy of the data source can be
considered a “black box” of unstructured, binary data. The objective of the initial, basic
examination of the data is to make it more structured and readable. Digital forensics tools
automate much of these preliminary examination and preprocessing tasks. This reduces the
manual task load for the investigator, and reduces the likelihood of mistakes, such as
overlooking essential evidence or damaging it. However, the value of manual examination
should not be underestimated, as algorithms cannot necessarily substitute for the intuition of an
experienced forensic investigator. As the data loads increase exponentially with Moore’s law,
triage has become an increasingly important part of digital forensics. The analogy relates to the
triage of patients, where treatment is prioritized based on the severity of the patient’s condition.
With respect to digital forensics, triage is the process that aims to identify the most relevant
data as quickly as possible. The purpose is to manage situations where one has a finite amount
of time and resources to carry out an investigation. Digital forensic tools support this need, for
example by extracting the most recently changed files from a computer.
Another technique that can be useful for the initial examination is to use known case
information to identify data of interest, such as malicious executable files or contraband image
files. There are typical web and Internet activity characteristics that can prove fruitful for an
investigation, such as email for communication, cached websites, bookmarks, and cookie files
for web activity. In general, the more the examination phase can structure and organize the data
for the investigators, the better the overview will be for later analysis of the actual content of
the data objects. File hashes can be used to identify files that you are searching for, such as
known images (e.g., contraband images) or known documents. A similar example for targeted
examination is to use a known keyword database to search for suspicious activity in general or
for the specific case in question. Forensic tools generally add metadata to each digital object,
including references to databases with known hashes and key words. The added metadata is
stored in common forensic file formats and can be used during further examination of the
evidence.
2.4.2 Forensic File Formats and Structures Many digital forensics toolkits and software
suites come with their own file formats or databases to store information that has been
collected in a structured manner. The forensic format used can have an impact on the
effectiveness of the forensic analysis. It is important that the formatting of the copied data
clearly reflects the evidence tied to the incident investigated and provides as much additional
information as possible. There are many different digital forensics formats, and the information
storage capabilities of these formats have different impacts on the investigation results. First
and foremost is the raw data format, which is used to copy the data source “as is.” The more
extensive storage formats are EnCase, SMART, AFF, and Prodiscover. The latter formats add
more information and flexibility to the extracted and examined data; this serves to improve
subsequent analysis. Examples of such additional information include metadata extractions,
integrity checks, archive decompressions, and file decryptions. In cases where huge volumes of
data are being copied for the investigation, examination can be difficult, and it is sometimes
impossible to analyze the data in one single image file. Because of this limitation, some
forensic file formats support splitting of image files, so that they can more easily be shared. If
such file formats are used, one needs to ensure that image splitting doesn’t affect the integrity
of the data. Forensic file formats typically support the most common data sources, such as
block devices, hard disk images, and computer memory. However, not all formats support all
file systems.
3 Data Recovery Most computer systems, digital devices, and file systems are typically
designed to treat information in the most efficient way to enhance performance and the user
experience. As a result, they are not designed to securely wipe or destroy data upon request. In
most modern file systems, only the pointer to the file is marked “available” or “unallocated.”
These results in the space being available and a new file can overwrite the previous file. Data
can thus be recovered from the storage area even after deletion of a file, as long as the data area
was not overwritten. For example, if an image were deleted years prior to an investigation,
parts of the image might still be extracted. The image data can be rebuilt in a viewer, and it will
represent the original material and its content, even though other details or portions of the data

are missing. In cases of deleted files, it is essential to carefully document traceability to the
original data source, since methods used for examination may change the state of data. These
actions need to be documented to maintain evidence integrity.
2.4.4 Data Reduction and Filtering Large amounts of data present a challenge for effective
digital forensics investigations. A single digital device may hold terabytes of data from billions
of files. All methods for safely reducing the data volume should be considered. Filtering is an
example of a method that can be used during examination. A well-known filtering or hash
lookup technique is based on databases with cryptographic hash values from known files.
Many files in a computer belong to the operating system, software, and other applications.
These files usually do not contain any useful evidence, and they can safely be ignored in the
examination/analysis. The use of known file databases, in combination with digital forensic
tools, makes it possible to improve the understanding of files that are known to be good or
simply to filter them out if considered useless. There are two categories of known files: known
bad files and known good files. Known bad hash databases can also be used to identify
suspicious files like malware and rootkits as well as images known to be associated with
criminal activities. The National Software Reference Library is an example of a library that
provides datasets of known good files that can be used to filter out operating system files,
application files, and more, leaving only files of interest for further analysis. Figure 2.13 shows
how known good files might be removed to reduce the total amount of data.

5 Timestamps A systems internal clock should always be noted, as should any deviations in
time zones or suspicions of incorrect system clocks. The recording of correct timestamps in an
investigation can help identify correlations across multiple data objects. In addition,
adjustments have to be made if the clock of one digital device is off and not synchronized
relative to accurate time sources. The investigator also needs to know whether the forensic tool
being used will display and support different time zone settings, and how these relate to local
machine times and UTC (coordinated universal time).
2.4.6 Compression, Encryption and Obfuscation During the examination phase, compressed
files should be uncompressed, and encrypted files should be decrypted if possible. Compressed
files are not necessarily difficult to handle as long as one knows the compression algorithm and
has tools to decompress the file. If proprietary compression algorithms are in use, it can be
more difficult and time-consuming to uncompress the data. It can also be that obscurity
techniques have been applied to complicate the identification of potential evidence. If pictures
or executable files are renamed and their extensions are changed to appear as text documents,
they need to be preprocessed before the upcoming analysis. Many tools support file type
extension matching to detect if a file is what its extension claims it to be. Encryption can be
used by corporations to secure their assets, by individuals for privacy protection, and by
criminals for anti-forensics. The encryption algorithm, key format, and length used may make
the examination of encrypted data simple, complex, or even impossible to accomplish within a
reasonable period of time and scope of resources. The increasing use of encryption and
obfuscation techniques is starting to become a serious challenge in digital forensics. To help
the forensic investigator, some forensic toolkits have built-in capabilities to crack passwords,
like the support for rainbow tables in the FTK toolkit. Steganography is a method for
concealing a hidden message, image, or other information in another file, message, image, or
video. For example, in digital pictures it is possible to store textual information in “hidden

layers” not visible to the eye or to typical photo applications such as MS Paint. Special tools
exist to make this possible, such as DeepSound, which is a tool to conceal information in audio
or music files. The benefit of using steganography over encryption is that it does not attract
attention. This introduces an additional complexity for digital forensics.
2.4.7 Data and File Carving
When data is collected from a data source, a forensic investigator may find it unstructured and
difficult to interpret. One might view files, such as photos and documents, with a computer
browser, but a collected data image can contain broken files, deleted files, scattered data
elements, and objects that stem from many years of using a computer or handheld digital
device. In order not to overlook potential evidence, there are tools and techniques available for
parsing or carving unstructured and sometimes raw binary data, as illustrated in Figure 2.15,
based on a similar presentation in Richard and Roussev (2005). Media file parsers use
techniques to identify patterns or signatures associated with particular file formats and types.
Most file types contain headers and footers that make them readable to the applications
handling them; these applications render the file as intended for use by the user. The use of
carving tools allows forensic examiners to select a set of file types to recover from a piece of
media. Media carving can be quite useful in order to acquire deleted files such as previously
deleted images. Other parsers are useful for examining one of the most common electronic
communication protocols: email. Email parsers can crawl through the raw data copied from a
digital device and render individual emails in a manner that makes it easier to analyze them in
later phases of an investigation. The parsing of standard, well-known file types is one thing; the
parsing of proprietary files and objects is a different matter. More manual work is required to
examine the information contained within the files and to ensure that they can be presented in a
format that is as readable as possible for a forensic analyst.

8 Automation Automation is an objective in itself during the examination phase, for reasons of
both forensic soundness and efficiency. Most of the tasks in the examination phase can be
automated using scripts or programs. File parsing, string searches, and extraction of
compressed files will significantly reduce the manual task load on an investigator, in particular
when working with large datasets. The most common digital forensic tools, such as EnCase,
offer special-purpose scripting languages to help automate tasks.
Presentation Phase
The presentation phase involves the final documentation and presentation of the results of the
investigation to a court of law or other applicable audiences, such as a corporation’s top
management or crisis management team. The presentation is based on objective findings with a

sufficient level of certainty, based on the analysis of digital evidence. It is important that the
findings are summarized and that all actions performed during the investigation are accounted
for and described in a fashion understandable by the audience
Definition 2.8: The Presentation Phase The process by which the examiner shares results
from the analysis phase in the form of reports to the interested party or parties.

1 The Final Reports You might think all the work has been completed. The evidence is “in
your hands” and is ready to put the suspect behind bars. But there is one thing left to do –
prepare the final report. As we can see from the digital forensics process, chain of custody and
evidence integrity rely on thorough documentation of all actions taken from the time you arrive
“at the scene” until the results are presented to the relevant authority. To wrap it up, the final
report should include all relevant case management information. The report describes the
context and background of what has been done, who has conducted the investigation, and what
was investigated. Typical information required in a final report is:
 roles and tasks assigned for the investigation;
 executive summary of all information sources and evidence;
 the forensic acquisition and analysis, which reflect chain of custody and evidence
integrity;
 visualizations and diagrams;
 images and screenshots;
 information that supports repeatability or reproducibility of the analysis;
 tools used; and
 Findings.
Many digital forensics tools have reporting functionality that documents and summarizes all
the interactions that have been carried out. This alone is not enough, especially since you may
have used a variety of tools, manual tasks, and analyses during the process. This means that the
investigator must be able to prepare this information so that it is understandable to a third
party. Ultimately, this is the purpose of the investigation: to present the findings in a clear and
understandable manner. It is also important for the report to sufficiently document
reproducibility. Given your report of the methods used and the same evidence, a skilled third
party should, in principle, be able to reproduce the findings. An example report generated by
the digital forensic analysis tool Autopsy is shown in Figure 2.21.The preparation of the final
report can be timeconsuming, especially for large and long-lasting investigation.
2 Presentation of Evidence and Work Conducted A wall of text is no good for anyone. As
we saw from the analysis phase of the digital forensics process, visualization techniques are
valuable in order to identify patterns and information that are not immediately obvious.
Presenting the final report professionally and in a format that is rich with visual aids will make
the complex and unstructured information available in an easy and understandable way. The
reader will not have the skills required to understand all the technical tasks conducted or the
technical details about the evidence. Diagrams, graphics, and timelines are powerful tools to
make the findings more accessible.

2.6.3 The Chain of Custody Circle Closes The documented chain of custody is the glue that
holds the forensics process together and supports the final evidence integrity so that it can be
presented as trustworthy evidence in court. If you have not documented all activities, a court
could claim that a critical task did not occur. No matter how carefully the work has been
completed, an inability to document the chain of custody for all phases could compromise the
trust in the authenticity and integrity of the evidence in court. The documentation made
throughout the digital forensics investigation, together with recommendations and expert
testimony, will form the final presentation. The evidence and methods used to find it are
presented to a court of law or to a corporate audience.
Digital Forensics Process
The phases, principles applied, and techniques are used in the digital forensics investigation
process. Understanding the digital scene of the incident, as well as the physical scene, has shown
to be crucial for the digital forensics process. The people applying the processes and the
technology supporting them are also fundamental aspects of forensically sound investigations.
Examples and scenarios have been presented to emphasize the relevance and importance of
having a process to structure the work conducted and the results presented. Cybercrime has over
the last decade evolved and continues to do so. As digitalization is all-encompassing and the
Internet is available to law-abiding actors as well as criminal actors, digital forensics has become
a central part of nearly any type of incident response or crime investigation. The forensic process
can help us to conduct common tasks in any forensic investigation and to reduce the number of
errors and mistakes made. This reduces the likelihood of criminals succeeding by manipulating
digital evidence. A common understanding of digital forensics terms and definitions helps us
establish a common platform that defines what actions are carried out on what data in each phase
in the forensics process. Because of this, we chose to define the most frequently applied terms
with respect to standards and best practices within the digital forensics field. In addition, the
forensic principles of chain of custody and evidence integrity, due to their importance in digital
evidence. In summary, the digital forensics process is a five-phase process, based on common
processes in the field. It comes with subphases and activities that can be applied for any digital
investigation: civil, criminal, or corporate. The phases are summarized as follows:
 Identification: Verification of event, incident, or crime.
 Collection: Evidence collection and acquisition of data.
 Examination: Preparation and examination of data and potential evidence.

 Analysis: Use of scientific methods to determine the facts about an incident or crime (if
any) and the significance of the evidence.
 Presentation: Documentation and reporting of evidence found.
The digital forensic process is a normative approach of conducting digital forensics investigations. It
is primarily grounded on a traditional physical forensics investigation process and includes all
required phases. These phases include the original notification, through the reporting to the final
presentation of the findings. It is important to act according to a defined process in order to identify
digital objects reflecting the facts of interest in criminal or civil courts of law. It is also important for
corporate and private investigations to verify the impact of an incident, in order to know whether there
were serious breaches, such as loss of confidential data. In this way, the process can be considered as
a part of a quality assurance system for digital forensics. The process is split into five consecutive, but
also iterative phases, which we will focus on in this section. The first phase is the identification of
potential evidence sources from digital devices. Then, we collect digital raw data by copying the
source in a forensically sound manner. Next, we examine the raw data, giving it structure so it is
easier to process and understand. Then we conduct the analysis, where we seek to gain a better
understanding and to identify digital objects that would ideally be the evidence that is, finally,
presented to a court of law or the entity of interest. The process is described as a step-bystep process
from start to end, but there can and will be multiple iterations of several phases. The process is
illustrated in Figure 2.1

Typically, the digital forensics process begins with an observation, alert, or notification of an event or
an incident related to a crime. Based on this, a hypothesis about the event or incident is made and the
investigation process is initiated. The most well-known processes have been analysed in order to
identify their common characteristics and phases. Typical characteristics of a digital forensics
investigation process have been summarized as follows:
 Adhere to the leading practice and theory from traditional forensic investigations.
 Be easily adaptable and practically oriented, and support traditional investigation steps.
 Remain independent of technology, product, and procedure.
 Applicable to law enforcement, corporate, and incident investigations.
 Support forensic reconstructions.
 Improve proper and efficient identification of facts.
 Limit unnecessary generation of new artifacts.
 Use and support forensic science and technology, and the results must be usable in a court of
law.
 Must be capable of being scrutinized by the judiciary if the case is presented in court.
To illustrate the iterative aspect of the process, let us consider a case where we have identified
multiple potential evidence sources. For example: we have seized a computer with multiple hard
drives from one suspect of a crime, a mobile handset owned by another suspect, an online file share
account, and the victim’s mp3 player. In this case, one would have to reiterate the process phases for

each potential evidence source. Each source will be collected and examined. The analysis for each
potential evidence source may be conducted one at a time, but often the data is analysed
simultaneously from several of the collected sources. This occurs since there may be correlating
events on the multiple devices that together form the final evidence to be presented in court.
There are multiple challenges to the forensics process and principles need to be accounted for
through the utilization of tools, processes, and digital forensics research. Adaptation of new
technology, ways to communicate online, use of the Internet, shared services, cloud services, the
Internet of Things, and big data, together with all the heterogeneous devices, platforms, and
technology available, make digital forensics a highly complex undertaking. Immense amounts of data
will challenge the effectiveness of forensic analysis.