Not often does a story touch me in a way that makes me fell conflicted in the way I feel about it.
I wanted to love this book so much more than I did because the story told was a fascinating one, where real world facts blend into fiction.
However, I found it very hard to enjoy the book because I really disliked the main character Amir. He was to cowardly, so childish throughout his whole life, whining and complaining through much of the 371 pages it took to tell the story.
While the villian of the book was truly a villian, at least he understood who he was.
Amir never figures out who he is until much later in his life.
I never felt bad once for Amir, but I loathed him even to the end.
And that's why I could not enjoy this novel more.
I couldn't connect with the character the author wanted his readers to connect with.
I do not fault his writing style because it was quite an easy read and very accessible.
Perhaps that's where the crux of the problem actually is.
By having too simple a writing style, the author took some of the weight off a story that needed something heavier.
Overall, this is a book that can be read while riding the train to and from work in a matter of a day or two.
However, I do not recommend this, because the softy in me found myself tearing up on a few occasions and trying to fight back the tears as other people trying to get to work pretended not to notice.

Why did I pick up this book?
because the cover caught my eye and I'm always interested in urban-fantasy novels where the main protagonist is male (since that's very rare), especially one from a female author.
So that really peaked my interest.
The Dark Storm is the first book in a new urban-fantasy series from author Kris Greene and while it does have some decent writing, it is amazingly generic.
It's almost like what if you took a bunch of stuff from other books- a world of demons, agents of light, vampires, goblins, knights, werewolves and mystical weapons of power, blended them all together and weaved the story around the template on "how-to" write an urban-fantasy novel.
If this was any more by-the-numbers I would have sworn I'd read it already.
The main problem I had with this book is it's characterization, or lack there of.
There's just way to many characters crammed into this slim work (the story constantly shifts through multiple POV's), that I felt like I was missing half the novel, like it was incomplete.
There's a sequel to The Dark Storm as there generally is with this sub-genre, but that's no excuse to have such a flimsy table setter.
I mean you want readers to come back for the rest of the series right?
Also, the two "main" characters of the book, Gabriel Redfeather and De Mona Sanchez (and yes that's her real name!!)
are so poorly formed as characters that they feel like they're cursory characters in the background, rather then the one's the whole series is based around.
And they both whined and whined so much, especially Gabriel, that I had to re-read the earlier pages and remind myself that he wasn't a freshman in highschool, but already in college!!!
However, I did like the magic system with the witches, warlocks and mages all having different functions in the world, and how there are numerous classes and castes within each magical house.
I also liked the back story of how there was a holy war centuries ago between the forces of light and the denizens of hell, and how the ancestors of both sides are fighting over the souls again years later.
But man, the most important aspect of the story, the very foundation the world is based around, the magical weapons, felt the weakest in the entire story.
Their characteristics and attributes are never fully thought out and explained, their powers appearing more as poor imagination rather than weapons that can control the very fabric of the world.
It's all just so generic that in 2 weeks I probably won't remember the story anymore and sadly I won't be coming back for the upcoming sequel Demon Hunt.
