Hmmm. Warning, this book is violent.
Yes there is a war against evil going on, but decapitations?
Blood spurting?
Brain matter on spears?
I don't think this is going in the school library.
I did like the book, just not as much as Eragon and Eldest. Paolini seemed to not have an ending in mind and the closer I got to the end of the book, the more obvious it was that there was going to have to be a fourth one.
I like the character Eragon and he seemed to be maturing in this book.
I wish Paolini spent more time on developing his characters as he did with the endless battle (read blood and guts) scenes.

This book was different.
I liked the first part.
I could relate with Pi on his views about God and religion.
He put into words my feelings when he said, "I just want to love God" to the three religious leaders (Catholic, Muslim, Hindu) when they asked him why he practiced all three religions.
I puzzled over the middle while he was lost at sea with the tiger.
I didn't get the island at all.
But in the end it all came together.

By A Customer I checked this out at the library and thought it had good information about how to cut your expenses and the author convinced me to pay off my mortgage early rather than putting my extra money into the stock market.
The first few CD's are very entertaining.
The last two CD's don't contain any useful information and are somewhat out of scope.
For instance, in the last CD he spends a significant amount of time talking about why only one parent should work because it's better on the kids.
He also goes on and on about how to be an asset to your company so you will get raises and not get laid off.
This is the type of CD that you will only listen to once so I highly recommend checking it out at your local library and saving the cash.
After all, you do want to cut down on debt, right?

"The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time" is a story of an autistic teenager who is excellent with numbers and has a photographic memory but lacks communication skills.
His view of the world is simple: if it is not true, it is a lie.
If he doesn't know a person, he shouldn't talk to him or her.
If it is yellow or brown, it can't be touched.
And nobody, not his father, not even his mother can touch him.
Mark Haddon's first book puts him in the league with great authors of our time.
The book is so well written and the story has been narrated in such convincing tone, that at times I had to make sure that Mark was not writing his autobiography!
When Fifteen-year-old Christopher John Francis Boone finds a murdered dog in his neighbors's frontyard, he picks him up instinctively.
That is because he likes dogs.
The neighbor assumes he killed the dog and from there start's Christopher's long and arduous journey to find the killer and unravel the mystery.
However, in doing so, Christopher finds more than he had bargained for.
His simple autistic mind cannot comprehend why anybody would kill a dog.
While the answer, which he uncovers by the middle of the book, makes no sense, it does bring him face to face with the surprising truth about his dead mother and that ultimately convinces him to travel to London. Now begins the story of a boy, a child, who hasn't stepped beyond his street alone but travels boldly all the way to a metropolis where even adults with all their sense and knowledge of the world can get lost.
Does he make it?
What happens to the killer of the dog?
What was the secret about his mother?
The book links all questions rather beautifully but still fails to impress.
This is a very one dimensional book.
The story didn't seem to be very original.
We have all read books, watched plays or movies of handicapped children who undertake huge tasks and complete them.
The book also fails to explore the relationship between Christopher and his mother even though his bond with his father has been explained well enough.
The only charcters that are well developed are Christoper and his father.
Readers get no insight into rest of the characters who could have very well defined the nature of relationship between Christopher and his parents.
CONCLUSION: Well written and moving but not entertaining.
Very one dimensional.
Read a few pages before you buy it.