The reason why this book can't be rated a 5 star is because people expect a little more from an author of Time to Kill, The firm and The Rainmaker.
Set amidst US presidential race, terrorist attacks in the middle east and 3 insignificant judges in a federal prison, the book spins a tale of political showdowns and prison scams that get intertwined in the most improbable but highly predictable way.
The narrative is very realistic, and just when it seems that the story is reaching its climax, it ends!
That is the weak point, the waterloo, the pearl harbour for this otherwise great plot.
The end just happens, as if the author is in a hurry to make it happen or lacks better imagination.
CONCLUSION: READABLE if you have nothing else to read.

In this short but insightful novel, Daniel Quinn has created a brand new view of history of mankind.
Told through interactions of a master and his student, Ishmael presents a view of history in a very different, and for some the real, light.
When narrator sees an advertisement in a newspaper that claims that a master is seeking students who would like to save the world, he is angry and suspicious because his past has brought him in touch with many so called saviors interested only in their own glory.
However, for some reason, he still goes to see the so called master.
What he finds there terrifies and surprises him.
But as he begins interacting with the master, Ishmael, he begins to realize that this is what he had been looking for all his life.
Ishmael presents a remarkably different view of the history of mankind.
While we, the humans, homo sapien sapien, the most corrupt of all species, have regarded earth as land to be conquered and ruled, Ishmael tells the narrator that other animals, inclding the older species of humans like neanderthals didn't die out, they chose to step aside in order to let nature take its course.
According to Ishmael life is not about winning or ruling the earth, it is to live and let live and this simple message is delivered in the book through some very logical anecdotes and analogies.
So why the 3 stars?
I have read Richard Bach, Dalai Lama and numberous other religous and philosophical texts.
I have found that every author presents his or her view on life and evolution and future of mankind.
But this is the world according to him.
What is true for one man is not always true for rest of us.
Though Ishmael does present some good examples, I didn't find the text powerfull enough to convince me.
Some explanations seem to be too simplistic.
CONCLUSION: Good book for readers interested in philosophical and intellectual explanation of history of humans.
