"Just plain fun" I don't see why this game got a lower score than the other Nintendogs.
I fail to see the new flaws to it that make it worse.
Story: You are a person looking for a dog, so you go to the local kennel and pick out your new best virtual friend!
After that there is no real story to it, so I'm not going to rate it upon story.
Difficulty: That actually depends upon the dog that you pick out and it's personality.
If it says that it is calm or something like that, it would be like to easy difficulty, but if he is naughty and needed lots of training, it would be the hard difficulty.
It's like the teams in Sonic Heroes, only the system works better.
Graphics: The graphics almost look lifelike.
The mouth physics on the dog work perfectly, the dog's body animations feel perfect.
I also haven't encountered any drops in the game's frame rate.
Controls: You'll find yourself mostly using the stylus for this game, by throwing things, rubbing your stylus on your dog's head to pet them, and showing them how to do tricks.
Overall, I don't see why this game got a lower score than the others.
It's just as fun.
I don't think people should dock it points because it's the same game.
The second game that was released wasn't docked any points.
Why's that?
Great Job!

"Mixed reactions" Kingdom Hearts... my second favourite PS2 game...
KH: Chain of Memories...
a good game, but not what i expected...
Story The plot is what really kept me fromlosing hope of this game.
The story continues from Kingdom Hearts. Sora, Donald and Goofy just found Pluto running with a letter.
The intro has PS2 graphics!
They find a man in a black cloak who leads him to Castle Oblivian.
He gets cards that takes him to different worlds.
The story is really the same as KH, but they replace "heart" with memory.
Do you remember in KH, Queen of Hearts from Alice in Wonderland accused her because she thought Alice Attempted to steal her heart?
In this Queen think the tried to steal her memory.
Other than that they introduce new characters.
And when you finish the game you unlock a new mode, which lets you play as Riku, with a different story, about Riku's darkness.
Gameplay The gameplay in battles are weird!!
But to get into a battle you see heartles walk around if they touch you you enter the battle, you can hit them with your Keyblade to stun the enemies when you enter (Mario & Luigi Superstar Saga?).
Well in-battle heartles surround you and you battle, you have cards depending on your attack.
Each card has a number depending you strong it is.
When you opponents attack you see wat card they use, and then you can use your card, if your card's number is higher you can break the opponents card, a 0 breaks anything but could be as easily broken by something higher.
You can 3 cards so you use them at once or use a special attack (so if you stock 3 keyblades, Sora does his 3 hit combo.
If you stock 3 Fire cards you unleash Firaga. Graphics Graphics are pretty good.
In KH do you know, when you start, the opening scene looks AWESOME and realistic, and the same for the end?
IN this game the Opening scene has the normal cutscene graphics as KH, same as the end.
The normal graphics are good too.
Sound Sound... I LOVE THE KH MUSIC!
This is good too!!
They do Simple & Clean at the end!
The sound is terrific.
Playtime This game could last...
after you finish Sora's mode you get Riku's mode.

"Instant classic" SSX 3 lets you play one of eight characters.
You can customize this character in many outrageous ways.
You can customize hair, snowboard suit, boots, shirts and much more.
Also you can buy new tricks.
The graphs are very, very good for good 'ol Xbox. You really have the feeling that you self are snowboarding on top of that big, fat mountain.
SSX 3 gives you a huge amount of freedom, because you can explore the mountain all by yourself and there are no linear routes that you have to take.
You decide which tournament you want to play, and where you wanna do that.
It's your choice.
The gameplay is very, very good.
You can unlock every tournament there is and still you are not finished.
You also have to beat rivals, explore the mountain, complete every extra bonus missions and collect stickers, drawings and dolls of the characters.
There is so much too do.
It just won;t bore you.
GET SSX 3! That's my only conclusion, if you don't have this game in your collection, get it now while it's still there and go and shame yourself!!!

NG2 doesn't disapoint!
It gets you strait where the first game left you - right into the action!
I'm still on the first level but so far I can yell: THERE IS NO ANY PROBLEM WITH THE CAMERA!
It is just perfect!
Not only you have the old lock behind the Ryo button but now you have total control over camera movement with the right stick (and you can adjust the speed of it at any time).
The frame rate is stable even through the pace of the game is considarably faster and there are more enemies on your ass at the same time.
I didn't experience any slow downs or others issues.
So far, so good, I'm as excited as anyone who has played the previous, Itakagi is my man, too bad he is leaving Tecmo but maybe its a good thing since I doubt he will stop making games...

"Best in series" Anyone who buys a game with the EA logo on it should always expect that game to have a few issues; especially with something that they release every year, like sports.
Sometimes the production deadlines must get in the way of perfecting the game mechanics because time and time again EA is guilty of this developer sin.
I'm talking mostly about online issues here, such as occasional but crippling lag, a camera that gets stuck from time to time...
It really kills the experience when a close game is ripped from your hands because the software failed to live up to its end of the bargain.
That being said, NBA Live 10 is fan-freakin-tastic!
The basketball mechanics are solid, almost perfect.
You really feel like you have total control over the player, and each superstar plays distinctively different.
The DNA option, which updates rosters and player ratings/tendencies to reflect real life NBA performance, is superb, and it really feels like you're playing in the NBA. If you want a great online sports game, grab this, just don't expect EA to get everything right.
When you are sitting watching an action film and the only thing you can think of is, 'Well, at least a lot of stuntmen got work', there is something wrong with the film.
In this film, there are too many problems to list.
However, here are a few.
Where was the writer?
Obviously, the script was bought and the writer was not brought aboard to work on it as the film went on.
The story was weak and beaten to death.
Disgruntled foreigner gets mad and wants to kill everybody and cause worldwide panic.
Wow. What a concept.
Actually, if done properly, it can be a good concept.
There were only a few things running against it being truly good.
They are Vin Diesel, the Director, the production crew and the continuity supervisor.
Unfortunately, all of these were involved in this film.
The continuity alone is enough to drive the average viewer insane.
From a GTO that can drive through Prague at 80 MPH (in the city), but can't go that fast in straight-aways to a deadly toxin that is rendered impotent by water.
Water? Yes. Water. I guess no one wanted to do any research and look for compounds that don't dilute quickly and become ineffective in water.
Am I asking too much in asking to SOME thought process while developing this film?
Then there is Vin Diesel. I can guarantee you, he was a much better bouncer than he ever will be an actor.
Does he have only one tone to his voice?
It's okay for a short film or small part in a film, but a whole feature?
It's like listening to Schwarzenegger, but he can do some acting.
A body and a voice do not an actor make.
Do you know who Jeff Chandler is?
Exactly!
Stay away from this film like the plague.
It's just bad.
The only good thing is the lead female who is a Russian spy.
If all spies looked like her and moved like her, there would be chaos in the world.
Unfortunately, it is not worth the $9.00 to go see her only.
It would be best to get it on cheap rental day at the video store.
Then, get a group of people together to pull money to 'share the pain'.
Hey, $0.50 out of your pocket is better than $9.00. I'd rather watch Howard the Duck again.
I'm going to go get a mint.
Just thinking of this film makes my stomach sour.
The reason why this book can't be rated a 5 star is because people expect a little more from an author of Time to Kill, The firm and The Rainmaker.
Set amidst US presidential race, terrorist attacks in the middle east and 3 insignificant judges in a federal prison, the book spins a tale of political showdowns and prison scams that get intertwined in the most improbable but highly predictable way.
The narrative is very realistic, and just when it seems that the story is reaching its climax, it ends!
That is the weak point, the waterloo, the pearl harbour for this otherwise great plot.
The end just happens, as if the author is in a hurry to make it happen or lacks better imagination.
CONCLUSION: READABLE if you have nothing else to read.

In this short but insightful novel, Daniel Quinn has created a brand new view of history of mankind.
Told through interactions of a master and his student, Ishmael presents a view of history in a very different, and for some the real, light.
When narrator sees an advertisement in a newspaper that claims that a master is seeking students who would like to save the world, he is angry and suspicious because his past has brought him in touch with many so called saviors interested only in their own glory.
However, for some reason, he still goes to see the so called master.
What he finds there terrifies and surprises him.
But as he begins interacting with the master, Ishmael, he begins to realize that this is what he had been looking for all his life.
Ishmael presents a remarkably different view of the history of mankind.
While we, the humans, homo sapien sapien, the most corrupt of all species, have regarded earth as land to be conquered and ruled, Ishmael tells the narrator that other animals, inclding the older species of humans like neanderthals didn't die out, they chose to step aside in order to let nature take its course.
According to Ishmael life is not about winning or ruling the earth, it is to live and let live and this simple message is delivered in the book through some very logical anecdotes and analogies.
So why the 3 stars?
I have read Richard Bach, Dalai Lama and numberous other religous and philosophical texts.
I have found that every author presents his or her view on life and evolution and future of mankind.
But this is the world according to him.
What is true for one man is not always true for rest of us.
Though Ishmael does present some good examples, I didn't find the text powerfull enough to convince me.
Some explanations seem to be too simplistic.
CONCLUSION: Good book for readers interested in philosophical and intellectual explanation of history of humans.

Why did I pick up this book?
because the cover caught my eye and I'm always interested in urban-fantasy novels where the main protagonist is male (since that's very rare), especially one from a female author.
So that really peaked my interest.
The Dark Storm is the first book in a new urban-fantasy series from author Kris Greene and while it does have some decent writing, it is amazingly generic.
It's almost like what if you took a bunch of stuff from other books- a world of demons, agents of light, vampires, goblins, knights, werewolves and mystical weapons of power, blended them all together and weaved the story around the template on "how-to" write an urban-fantasy novel.
If this was any more by-the-numbers I would have sworn I'd read it already.
The main problem I had with this book is it's characterization, or lack there of.
There's just way to many characters crammed into this slim work (the story constantly shifts through multiple POV's), that I felt like I was missing half the novel, like it was incomplete.
There's a sequel to The Dark Storm as there generally is with this sub-genre, but that's no excuse to have such a flimsy table setter.
I mean you want readers to come back for the rest of the series right?
Also, the two "main" characters of the book, Gabriel Redfeather and De Mona Sanchez (and yes that's her real name!!)
are so poorly formed as characters that they feel like they're cursory characters in the background, rather then the one's the whole series is based around.
And they both whined and whined so much, especially Gabriel, that I had to re-read the earlier pages and remind myself that he wasn't a freshman in highschool, but already in college!!!
However, I did like the magic system with the witches, warlocks and mages all having different functions in the world, and how there are numerous classes and castes within each magical house.
I also liked the back story of how there was a holy war centuries ago between the forces of light and the denizens of hell, and how the ancestors of both sides are fighting over the souls again years later.
But man, the most important aspect of the story, the very foundation the world is based around, the magical weapons, felt the weakest in the entire story.
Their characteristics and attributes are never fully thought out and explained, their powers appearing more as poor imagination rather than weapons that can control the very fabric of the world.
It's all just so generic that in 2 weeks I probably won't remember the story anymore and sadly I won't be coming back for the upcoming sequel Demon Hunt.
