SHANGHAIED HEART relates the story of a 15 year old, Black, rape victim who makes the best of the horrible situation she finds herself thrust into.
Poor and living in1960s rural Central Washington State, she has nowhere to turn for the husband she must marry, except to conscript a fellow high school student, an innocent White boy.
On the surface an unlikely romance, the story draws strong parallels to the coexisting US Civil Rights Movement: The Heroine: To all those Blacks who suffered abuse at the hands of others and developed strength to live through it.
The Hero: To those Whites far removed so as to know little about Blacks and their situation, but who understand that justice sees no skin color.
The Rapist: All those, no matter what their own race, who perpetrated injustice, violent or otherwise, against Blacks The Hero's parents: Those Whites who always treated people fairly, regardless of their race, and taught their children to do likewise.
The Heroine's father: Those hardworking Blacks who wanted nothing more than to make the best life they could by the productivity of their own hands.
The Hero's boss, the boss's wife, the College President, College Board Members, a Bank teller, Bank manager, Scottsburg Police Department, County Sheriff's Office, and the more minor characters are a mix ranging from virtuous to bigoted and vindictive.
Particularly touching is the scene in which the Hero explains race to his six-year-old, bi-racial daughter.
After a violent start, the story develops at a more livable pace, building the characters and events to climax in the Hero's gut-wrenching search for the Heroine and their daughter, both kidnaped by the sadistic, murdering Rapist. SHANGHAIED HEART's setting and plot give the reader an intimate glimpse of that era in rural life, as well as bringing home what it's like to endure racial discrimination.

Anita Diamant's superb book takes the well known story of Jacob and his 12 sons and gives voice to the women long silent.
This work of historical fiction explores the experiences of the women in relation to their men as well as the relationships between the women.
The first half of the book is the story of Jacob's four wives: their love for the same man, their conflicts, and the bond between sisters and women.
Each month the women join together in the red tent for several days.
Rather than a source of disgrace, the book gives a reaffirming message of what it means to be a women and worships the ability to give life, which the mothers pass on to their daughter Dinah . As interesting as the relationships between the characters, the book presents a myriad of the religious practices of the time.
Througout the book we see that the women continue to practice their own religious beliefs, until a dramatic conflict with Jacob. In the second half of the book, the reader is able to catch a glimpse of Egyptian gods and godesses.
However, these mentions are often brief and may leave one wanting to hear more and explore the level of monotheism that was really practiced.
The second half of the book follows Dinah into Egypt after she flees tragedy in Canaan. The second half is less interesting than the first, but the reading is fast and moves quickly.
The portrayal of Joseph is a far cry from his broadway persona and there is little in the way of explanation for why he has become the greedy selfish man that he is.
Dinah's sotry ends with a bitterswee tone.
After seeing her family from afar at her father's death, she receives some sense of reconciliation from the family that remains.
After returning to Egypt, Dinah dies surrounded by loved ones and returns to her waiting mothers.
The ending offers some conclusion to the divides within her family and we see that life continues on.

This is one amazingbook about a man (Gary Paulsen) and his experiances with running the Iditarod dog race in Alaska. It goes through his nothing but humorous traing process, and then onto the grueling, tiring, painful race.
This book shows how one man connects with nature and his dogs and how these dogs arent being changed by him, but he is being changed by the dogs.
He gives a great account of his loving (and obviously favorite) dog Cookie, the lead of his team.
He goes through the relationships with everyone he meets and his thoughts while reviewing for the race before it's start in Anchorage, Alaska. Paulsen is one of my all time favorite authors and when i read this I was impressed with the emotion, and hysterical hallucinations and I was glad that this book went way over my expectations.
I reccomend this book to everyone and anyone, especially those who enjoy the great outdoors and animals.
Nothing but the best!!

Vicente himself observed that before him there only existed sophisticated guidelines on different aspects of human-machine interaction but no holistic approach that is fit for the engineer.
So he undertook the work and succeeded.
Building on known technics he refined and combined them to form a coherent framework that guides you from the first assessment to the final delivery, putting emphasis on the 'get it right the first time' principle.
In contrast with other books on human machine interaction the ideas of the book are coherent, logical and refreshing to read.
The work is intended for big industrial projects, so our positive experince with a small-scale project is not representative.
Still, Vincentes book is not a cookery-book but on the abstract and generic level and capable of being used in very different enviroments.
The only drawback is the use of the example microworld.
I believe that most readers would have rather read about Vincentes experience in nuclear power plants with all its technical complexity than being bored by his fabricated and dull pump system.
